---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:21 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:55 am
---

# McAlpine v Panatown [2001] 1 AC 518

## Summary

AM was employed by P to construct an office building and car park on land owned by UIP. P and UIP were associated companies, with funds for the project being provided to P by the group, and with P being under no contractual obligation to UIP to carry out the construction. The rationale behind the scheme was the avoidance of VAT. AM entered into a separate Duty of Care Deed with UIP giving restricted remedies to successive owners of the site. P claimed substantial damages for breach of contract after the building was found to be defective, to include the loss suffered by UIP. AM appealed a ruling that it was liable to P, contending that, as P had no proprietary interest in the site, it had suffered no financial loss. The court held that neither the exception to the usual rule that a person cannot recover substantial damages for breach of contract where he has suffered no loss, nor the principle that a person could recover substantial damages on the ground that they had not received the bargain for which they had contracted applied as UIP had its own cause of action contained in the Duty of Care Deed.

## Abstract

A, a building contractor, was employed by P to construct an office building and a car park on land belonging to UIP, an associated company of P. Defects appeared in the building and P launched arbitration proceedings against AM claiming substantial damages. AM appealed against a decision to allow a claim by P ([1998] C.L.C. 636), arguing that P had suffered no financial loss. No contractual relationship existed between P and UIP to complete the building work. Nevertheless, AM had entered into a separate duty of care deed with UIP, giving UIP and successive owners restricted remedies in respect of defective work. Although the case of, _[Linden Gardens Trust Ltd v Lenesta Sludge Disposal Ltd [1994] 1 A.C. 85, [1993] 7 WLUK 264](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0FFD110E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a08f147f81348c78490b1ea594cb73f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ had established the principle that a party not suffering any loss might be able to claim on behalf of a third party for the benefit of whom the contract was entered into, it was argued in the instant case that this exception did not apply as UIP had a direct remedy against AM.

Held, allowing the appeal (Lord Goff and Lord Millett dissenting), that in circumstances where a contract between a builder and an employer was for the construction of a building on the land of a third party who would own that building, the employer could seek substantial damages from the builder for any defects in the building only where the third party actually suffering the loss had no direct remedy against that builder. Where a direct remedy existed, such as in the form of a duty of care deed, the employer would be entitled to nominal damages only. The purpose of the exception to the rule that the party suffering no loss could not claim, as expounded in _[Owners of Cargo Laden on Board the Albacruz v Owners of the Albazero [1977] A.C. 774, [1976] 7 WLUK 168](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I150D0310E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a08f147f81348c78490b1ea594cb73f&contextData=(sc.Default))_, and applied in Linden Gardens, was to provide a remedy to third parties where no other remedy would be available. The force of that reasoning was lost, however, where the third party had a direct right to claim substantial damages. Accordingly, in the instant case, as UIP had a direct remedy, it could not be argued that P's interest in the due performance of the contract had suffered. P had not suffered substantial loss and was entitled to nominal damages only.
