---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:21 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:55 am
---

# Monarch Steamship Co Ltd v AB Karlshamns Oljefabriker [1949] AC 196

(1) It is well established, that deviation necessarily made to remedy unseaworthiness does not amount to unjustifiable deviation or destroy the right to rely on the terms of the contract of carriage unless it is established that the owners know of the vessel's state on sailing. Thus delay caused by a vessel's unseaworthiness which brings her within an excepted peril will, as a general rule, only provide the occasion but not the cause of operation of such peril. Where, however, the basis of liability is delay, it is the reasonable anticipation which matters, and, consequently, in a case where, in the conditions existing in April, 1939, owners had reason to apprehend a state of affairs in which delay would bring a war clause, which had been inserted in the contract of carriage, into operation, it was held, that the owners, who without their knowledge had provided an unseaworthy vessel, were liable in damages when such unseaworthiness caused delay and such delay prevented the vessel from proceeding to its destination because war had broken out in the meantime and a government embargo prohibited delivery at the stipulated port.

Per Lord Wright:

>"To satisfy the definition of unseaworthiness it must exist at the commencement of the voyage. It must, however, still be in effective operation at the time of the casualty, and from its very nature it must always, or almost always, operate by means of and along with the specific and immediate peril. That is because the essence of unseaworthiness as a cause of loss or damage is that the unseaworthy ship is unfit to meet the peril".

(Lord Porter, doubting, whether a shipowner ought to have foreseen that a war would be likely to occur, or if he did, that the carriage of goods to the stipulated port would be prohibited; affirming decision of Court of Session ((1947) 80 Ll. L. Rep. 151); _Malcolm Baxter Jr, The (1928) 31 Ll. L. Rep. 200, [1928] 5 WLUK 49_ distinguished).

(2) Whether damage is remote or “natural” and direct can in general only be decided on a review of the circumstances of each special case. Remoteness of damage is, in truth, a question of fact. Damages are not treated either as special or remote if they flow from the natural business position of the parties, which the Court assumes must be reasonably known to them. Thus, in a case whereby reason of the unseaworthiness of a vessel, for which the owners of the vessel were held liable, the owners, as a result of the outbreak of war, were prevented from carrying a cargo of soya beans to the stipulated port, where no soya beans could be procured, it was held that the assignees of the bill of lading for the soya beans were not obliged to accept soya beans in some other quarter of the globe by way of substituted performance, but had a right to require the soya beans to be delivered at the place stipulated, and, as the owners of the vessel failed to carry out their bargain to deliver there, the direct and natural consequence was that the assignees of the bill of lading should arrange for the carriage forward and charge the owners with the reasonable cost of doing so. ( _[Connal, Cotton & Co v Fisher, Renwick & Co (1883) 10 R. 824, [1883] 3 WLUK 88](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8B5050E0E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6606716eb4524ae18bf2513842b1d573&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Hadley v Baxendale 156 E.R. 145, [1854] 2 WLUK 132](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB88D33D1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6606716eb4524ae18bf2513842b1d573&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).
