---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:22 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:55 am
---

# Omak Maritime Ltd v Mamola Challenger Shipping Co Ltd [2010] EWHC 2026

## Summary

Wasted expenditure could not be recovered as damages for breach of contract where an award of damages on that basis would put the claimant in a better position than he would have been in had the contract been performed.

## Abstract

The appellant charterer (C) appealed against an arbitration award in favour of the respondent shipowner (S).

C agreed to charter S's vessel for five years. Under the charterparty S was required to make certain modifications to the vessel prior to delivery which included the installation of a new crane. S incurred various expenses in preparation for those modifications, including the cost of removing the crane from another vessel. Doubts arose as to whether C would perform the fixture, and ultimately S accepted C's conduct as repudiatory. The expenses which S had incurred were wasted; they had no residual value or benefit for S. However, the market rate of hire was higher than the charterparty rate. Nevertheless, S claimed as damages the expenses it had incurred in preparing to perform the charterparty. The arbitrators held that because S was able to trade the vessel at the higher market rate it had earned or would earn more than it would have earned under the charterparty, and the excess was greater than the amount of the wasted expenditure. They nevertheless awarded S damages for wasted expenditure.

C submitted that the tribunal's decision was wrong in law since S had in fact suffered no loss by reason of C's breach because the market rate of hire was higher than the charter rate and therefore S more than recuperated the losses it claimed in the arbitration; in the circumstances to award any damages to S other than nominal damages breached the compensatory principle.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The law of damages permitted a claimant to seek damages on the reliance basis rather than upon the expectancy basis. He could frame his damages claim by reference to the expenses incurred by him in reliance on the contract being performed, rather than his expected profit, _[Cullinane v British Rema Manufacturing Co Ltd [1954] 1 Q.B. 292, [1953] 10 WLUK 108](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I92D0B5E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c9e3a611e52141e9b590f68c05ab8d38&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Anglia Television Ltd v Reed [1972] 1 Q.B. 60, [1971] 7 WLUK 145](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5E343C30E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c9e3a611e52141e9b590f68c05ab8d38&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. In a typical claim for damages for breach of contract on the expectancy basis both expected profits and necessary expenses would be taken into account, _[British Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Co Ltd v Underground Electric Railways Co of London Ltd (No.2) [1912] A.C. 673, [1912] 7 WLUK 88](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7B9FAB10E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c9e3a611e52141e9b590f68c05ab8d38&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. In the instant case, S, having abandoned its claim to damages on the expectancy basis, claimed damages in the sum of the expenses incurred in reliance on the contract being performed. However, in such a case the claimant was not entitled to claim damages on a basis which would place him in a better position than he would have been in had the contract been performed, since that principle was fundamental, _[Robinson v Harman [1843-60] All E.R. Rep. 383, [1848] 1 WLUK 169](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2A8511C0E57111DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c9e3a611e52141e9b590f68c05ab8d38&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[C&P Haulage v Middleton [1983] 1 W.L.R. 1461, [1983] 6 WLUK 192](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I804ABC90E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c9e3a611e52141e9b590f68c05ab8d38&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed.

(2) The authorities stated a rational and sensible explanation for the view that the expectation loss principle underpinned the award of damages in wasted expenditure cases. The expenditure which was sought to be recovered was incurred in expectation that the contract would be performed. It was therefore rational to have regard to the position that the claimant would have been in had the contract been performed. If there were an independent principle pursuant to which expenditure incurred in expectation of the performance of a contract was recoverable without regard to what the position would have been had the contract been performed, the defendant would in effect underwrite the claimant's decision to enter the contract. If the contract was unwise from his point of view, because his expenses were likely to exceed any gross profit, it was difficult to understand why the defendant should pay damages in an amount equal to that expenditure. His breach had not caused that loss. The claimant's expenditure should only be recoverable where the likely gross profit would at least cover that expenditure. The burden was on the defendant to show that the likely profits would not at least equal the claimant's expenditure, _[CCC Films (London) Ltd v Impact Quadrant Films Ltd [1985] Q.B. 16, [1983] 12 WLUK 41](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I837C4D70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c9e3a611e52141e9b590f68c05ab8d38&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.

(3) The arbitrators' error was to regard a claim for wasted expenses and a claim for loss of profits as two separate and independent claims which could not be mixed. But the weight of authority clearly showed that both claims were illustrations of, and governed by, the fundamental principle in Robinson v Harman, which required the court to compare the claimant's position with what it would have been had the contract been performed.
