---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:24 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:39 am
---

# Armes v Nottingham County Council [2017] UKSC 60

## Summary

Local authorities were not subject to a non-delegable duty to ensure that reasonable care was taken for the safety of children in care, while they were in the care and control of foster carers. However, _[Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] UKSC 10, [2016] A.C. 660, [2016] 3 WLUK 91](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65B75A40E06211E59DDDADF5CA0D0D31/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default))_ pointed towards the imposition of vicarious liability on local authorities for torts committed by foster carers against such children. A local authority was held to be vicariously liable for physical and sexual abuse committed by foster carers in the 1980s.

## Abstract

The appellant, a former foster child, appealed against a decision that the respondent local authority was not liable for physical and sexual abuse she had suffered at the hands of her foster parents while in care in the 1980s.

It was accepted that the local authority had not been negligent in the selection or supervision of the foster parents. The issue was whether it was nevertheless liable to the appellant, either on the basis that it was in breach of a non-delegable duty of care, or on the basis that it was vicariously liable for the foster parents' wrongdoing.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(Lord Hughes dissenting on vicarious liability)

**(1) Non-delegable duty of care -** The proposition that a local authority was under a duty to ensure that reasonable care was taken for the safety of children in care, while they were in the care and control of foster parents, was too broad, and the responsibility with which it fixed local authorities was too demanding, _[Carmarthenshire CC v Lewis [1955] A.C. 549, [1955] 2 WLUK 68](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8285DF80E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Harris v Perry [2008] EWCA Civ 907, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 19, [2008] 7 WLUK 983](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I77DEFC805F8E11DD865DBD55EABB2532/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Surtees v Kingston upon Thames RBC [1991] 2 F.L.R. 559, [1991] 3 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC6994850E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Although there were differences between the position of local authorities and that of parents, children in care had the same needs as other children. In particular, it might be in their best interests to spend time staying with their parents, grandparents, relatives or friends. That was specifically permitted by the [Child Care Act 1980 s.21(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAEAA51D1B7DC11DF813FC6FD5848E001/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default)). If a local authority which reasonably decided that it was in the best interests of a child to allow him to stay with his family or friends was to be held strictly liable for any want of due care on the part of those persons, the law of tort would risk creating a conflict between the local authority's duty towards the child under [s.18(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAEA6A850B7DC11DF813FC6FD5848E001/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default)) and its interests in avoiding exposure to such liability.

Furthermore, since a non-delegable duty would render the local authority strictly liable for the tortious acts of the child's parents or relatives, if the child was living with them following a decision reasonably taken under s.21(2), the effect of a care order, followed by the placement of the child with his family, would be a form of state insurance for the actions of the child's family members. Section 21 was relevant in another respect. It required the local authority to "discharge" its duty to provide accommodation and maintenance for a child in its care in whichever of the specified ways it thought fit, including "boarding him out" by placing him with foster carers. The implication of the word "discharge" was that the placement of the child constituted the performance of the local authority's duty to provide accommodation and maintenance. That suggested that the duty of the local authority in the instant case was not to perform the function in the course of which the appellant was abused (namely, the provision of daily care), but rather to arrange for, and then monitor, its performance, _[Woodland v Swimming Teachers Association [2013] UKSC 66, [2014] A.C. 537, [2013] 10 WLUK 735](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DC1F0603BDC11E398B4EB639F495A5C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. [Section 22](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I287541C0CA8111E09785FF298A5740B8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default)) was also relevant.

It enabled the secretary of state to make regulations imposing duties on local authorities in relation to the boarding-out of children. Section 22 implied that the continuing responsibility of the local authority for the care of the child was discharged in relation to the boarding-out of children by means of the prior approval of households where children were boarded out, the subsequent inspection and supervision of the premises, and the removal of children from the premises if their welfare appeared to require it. The statutory regime did not impose on the local authority any other responsibility for the day to day care of the child or for ensuring that no harm came to him in the course of that care (see paras [39-49](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**(2) Vicarious liability -** Consideration of the factors discussed in _[Cox v Ministry of Justice [2016] UKSC 10, [2016] A.C. 660, [2016] 3 WLUK 91](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65B75A40E06211E59DDDADF5CA0D0D31/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08a11c0ca59a4dad8b4dd4b537cf1000&contextData=(sc.Default))_ pointed towards the imposition of vicarious liability on the local authority for the torts committed by the appellant's foster carers:  
(a) the appellant's foster parents could not be regarded as carrying on an independent business of their own. The torts committed against the appellant were committed by the foster parents in the course of an activity carried on for the benefit of the local authority;  
(b) in terms of risk creation, the local authority's placement of children in their care with foster parents created a relationship of authority and trust between the foster parents and the children, in circumstances where close control could not be exercised by the local authority, and so rendered the children particularly vulnerable to abuse;  
(c) the local authority exercised powers of approval, inspection, supervision and removal without any parallel in ordinary family life. By virtue of those powers, it exercised a significant degree of control over both what the foster parents did and how they did it, in order to ensure that the children's needs were met; (d) most foster parents had insufficient means to be able to meet a substantial award of damages. The local authorities which engaged them could more easily compensate the victims of abuse (paras [52-64](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(3) (Per Lord Hughes) -** It seemed to follow that if vicarious liability applied to ordinary foster carers, it also had to apply to "family and friends" placements. The prospect of vicarious liability in those circumstances would be apt to inhibit the generally laudable practice of such placements. It would also result in increased litigation of family activity in the courts, which was undesirable (paras [76-90](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
