---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:25 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:35 am
---

# O'Hare v Coutts & Co [2016] EWHC 2224 (QB)

## Summary

A financial adviser's duty to communicate with his client to ensure that the client understood the advice and the risks attendant on a recommended investment was not governed by the Bolam test, but was informed by the content of the relevant regulatory rules. The defendant bank had adequately explained proposed investments to the claimants and the investments were objectively suitable.

## Abstract

The claimant investors claimed that the defendant bank was liable to them for breach of its duty to exercise reasonable skill and care when advising them on making certain investments, and for breach of duties arising under the Conduct of Business Sourcebook (COBS).

The claimants were a husband and wife. He had built up and sold a successful chemical engineering business. They entered into an agreement with the bank for it to provide them with investment advice. They were advised by the bank's employee (S). They made various investments and also borrowed to invest. After the engineering business was sold they had cash to invest. In 2007 and 2008, when their total estimated wealth including real property was about £38 million, they invested over £8 million in three hedge-fund products marketed by the bank. The first claimant did not complain at the time that the products had been missold, but he did complain about a previous investment and said that the bank had agreed to pay £250,000 to settle the complaint. By then S had left the bank. Some of the hedge-fund products were loss-making and were liquidated. In 2010 the claimants invested £10 million in two funds run by a subsidiary of the Royal Bank of Scotland, which was then mainly owned by the government. The claimants' case was that the 2007/8 products recommended by S and the bank were unsuitable investments with no capital protection; that S unjustifiably played down the substantial increase in risk involved; that the investments meant that an unjustifiably high proportion of their wealth was exposed to losses; that they were not sophisticated investors; and that agreeing to make the investments meant only being persuaded to accept the advice that they were suitable. The claimants also contended that the 2010 investments were unsuitable: too much money was placed with one institution, and the bank should have advised against that and looked for suitable investments spread across the whole market; the charges and details of the investments were not properly disclosed. The bank said that it gave proper investment advice and that the investments were suitable. The settlement of the complaint involved a non-binding statement of intent to provide US$250,000 through discounts or credits to the claimants' accounts, as a gesture of goodwill. S did not give evidence at the trial.

## Held

Judgment for defendant.

(1) It was obvious from the start of proceedings that S would be a key witness of fact in relation to the period up to 2008. His contemporaneous notes of meetings and conversations were available. They were challenged as playing down the extent of his salesmanship and exaggerating the first claimant's appetite for risk. The notes formed part of the agreed trial bundle and were accordingly admissible as evidence of the correctness of their content. What weight was to be given to them was a different question. Relevant considerations were set out in the [Civil Evidence Act 1995 s.4(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7E9FE101E44E11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default)). No complete explanation was given for his failure to appear. The claimants could not be expected to call him as a witness rather than the bank. He was the person alleged to have given negligent advice. He could be expected to vouch for his own account and challenge that of the first claimant. Without him, significant parts of the first claimant's account were uncontradicted except by notes that were disputed and not defended by their maker. The court declined to prefer the contemporaneous notes to the evidence of the first claimant generally. The first claimant was an honest and truthful witness and S's notes omitted any reference to the use of selling techniques (see paras [23-58](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) The bank's contractual obligation was to work with the claimants to develop an investment strategy and advise from time to time on investments to implement that strategy. That was what happened. The obligation to develop an investment strategy required the bank to liaise with the claimants and recommend products as and when agreed or when the bank considered it appropriate to recommend a particular product, whether its own or that of a third party. It was not a breach of contract as such that S did not recommend third party products (paras [195-197](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) The Bolam test applied to the recommendation of suitable investments. The standard for giving advice was that of a reasonably competent practitioner, _[Matrix Securities Ltd v Theodore Goddard [1998] S.T.C. 1, [1997] 11 WLUK 228](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEFDBD530E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Barker v Baxendale Walker Solicitors [2016] EWHC 664 (Ch), [2016] S.T.I. 1266, [2016] 3 WLUK 692](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I384226C0F1A711E59B41F516958383FE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. However, the requirement for communication between financial adviser and client to ensure that the client understood the advice and the risks attendant on a recommended investment was not governed by Bolam, _[Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] UKSC 11, [2015] A.C. 1430, [2015] 3 WLUK 306](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDB9454F0C81411E4A78EFBC44AC46A85/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Baird v Hastings (t/a Hastings and Co Solicitors) [2015] NICA 22, [2015] 5 WLUK 107](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0CB128203D2111E5A19BB19EBAFDF2CB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The regulatory regime was strong evidence of what the common law required, since the skill and care to be expected of a financial adviser would ordinarily include compliance with the regulatory rules, _[Loosemore v Financial Concepts [2001] Lloyd's Rep. P.N. 235, [2000] 11 WLUK 560](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I70D75CA0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Green v Royal Bank of Scotland Plc [2013] EWCA Civ 1197, [2014] Bus. L.R. 168, [2013] 10 WLUK 284](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IECB4AC40313811E38809FB3F7C840358/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. A duty to explain in terms not dissimilar to the Montgomery formulation was found in the COBS rules. In the instant case the COBS rules added nothing to the contractual and common law obligations imposed on the bank to ascertain the claimants' requirements and objectives and to advise on, explain and inform them about suitable investments. The factual history spanned more than a decade and there were numerous discussions about the claimants' investments. There was no lack of adequate communication and explanation (paras [199-214](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) The 2007/8 investments were objectively suitable. Despite S's salesmanship, responsibility for the investment decision could fairly be taken by the claimants (paras [215-227](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The 2010 investments were also objectively suitable, even though they involved placing £10 million with a single banking institution. The products were not high risk because, in the absence of early termination or the insolvency of the issuer, the capital was protected. It followed that the bank had not been negligent (paras [241-251](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(5) The bank undertook a binding obligation to credit the claimants with a total of $250,000 by applying credits or discounts against amounts otherwise chargeable, _[Clarke v Nationwide Anglia Building Society [1998] E.G. 47 (C.S.), [1998] 3 WLUK 314](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8852DBC0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Edwards v Skyways [1964] 1 W.L.R. 349, [1964] 1 WLUK 877](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA008CE01E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=406f91afb2b84b0799a9709ccfbf07f7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The bank had complied with that obligation (paras [228-240](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
