---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:26 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:33 am
---

# Uber BV v Aslam [2018] EWCA Civ 2748

## Summary

The transportation network, "Uber", employed drivers as "workers" for the purposes of the [Employment Rights Act 1996 s.230(3)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBC4931F0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default)). The characterisation of the relationship between the drivers and Uber in the written documentation did not properly reflect the reality of the arrangement, and the parties' actual agreement had to be determined by examining all the circumstances.

## Abstract

Companies in the "Uber" group appealed against the Employment Appeal Tribunal's decision that Uber London Ltd (ULL) employed the respondent drivers as "workers", for the purposes of the [Employment Rights Act 1996 s.230(3)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBC4931F0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default)), the [Working Time Regulations 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I72A8BBE1E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the [National Minimum Wage Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB8B621E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default)).

Uber operated through a smartphone app. Drivers contracted with ULL's parent company (UBV) to gain access to the app. The contract stated that UBV was a technology services provider which did not provide transportation services or function as an agent for the transportation of passengers. ULL held the relevant private hire vehicle (PHV) operator's licence for London. Prospective passengers downloaded the app, and thereby entered into a "rider agreement" with ULL, under which ULL purported to be the drivers' agent. When a trip request was made, ULL passed it to the nearest available driver and confirmed the booking to the passenger when the driver accepted it. The passenger paid the fare to UBV by credit or debit card. UBV paid drivers weekly, on the basis of the fares charged, less a service fee. The EAT upheld the employment tribunal's decision that any driver who had the app switched on, was within the territory in which he was authorised to work, and was able and willing to accept assignments, was working for ULL under a "worker" contract with ULL. It held that any supposed contract between driver and passenger was a pure fiction, bearing no relation to the real relationships between the parties.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(Underhill LJ dissenting)

**Correct test for determining whether an individual was a "worker"** - It was clear from the decision in _[Autoclenz Ltd v Belcher [2011] UKSC 41, [2011] 4 All E.R. 745, [2011] 7 WLUK 790](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I08149D80B85311E0BC909A9CE0A1802B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that, in an employment context, the written documentation might not reflect the reality of the relationship. The parties' actual agreement had to be determined by examining all the circumstances, of which the written agreement was only a part. That was particularly so where the issue was the insertion of clauses which were relied on to avoid statutory protection. The fact that a party had signed a document would be relevant, but not conclusive where the terms were standard and non-negotiable and where parties were in unequal bargaining positions. Uber argued that the principles arising from Autoclenz could not be used to disregard the rider agreement because the agreement was a contract between passenger and driver, not an employment contract. However, the effect of Autoclenz was that the court could disregard the terms of any contract created by the employer if it did not reflect the reality of what was occurring on the ground. Otherwise, employers would simply be able to evade the consequences of Autoclenz by creating elaborate contrivances involving third parties, Autoclenz followed, _[Secret Hotels2 Ltd (formerly Med Hotels Ltd) v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2014] UKSC 16, [2014] 2 All E.R. 685, [2014] 3 WLUK 72](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE3BB9C50A4C611E3A3358EDC5E266D52/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ not applied, _[Addison Lee Ltd v Lange [2019] I.C.R. 637, [2018] 11 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I67E7F1F0E82811E882D8CF08B463E3D2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (see paras [49-50, 54, 65-66, 73](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Analysis of instant circumstances** - The tribunal had been correct to find that each of the drivers was working for ULL as a "worker" for the purposes of s.230(3)(b). The passenger had no contract to compel the driver to pick them up. The contract at the point of accepting the request had to be with ULL. There was no general comparison with minicabs or black cabs as the contractual arrangements in the instant case were highly fact-specific (paras [80-86](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). There was also a high degree of fiction in the wording of the standard form agreement between UBV and the drivers. For example, despite being the PVH operator in London, ULL was scarcely mentioned. That omission was striking because ULL exerted a high degree of control over the drivers. It was difficult to see how it was entitled to do so other than under a contractual relationship with each driver. After each ride was completed, UBV generated an invoice addressed to the passenger by the driver. However, the invoice document was clearly a fiction because it did not show the passenger's full name or contact details and was not sent to the passenger (paras [90-93](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Further, a number of public statements made by Uber reinforced the drivers' case that the organisation ran a transportation business and employed the drivers to that end. The tribunal's findings in relation to the nature of the relationship between Uber and the drivers provided ample evidence to support its conclusion that the drivers were working for Uber (paras [71, 94, 96](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Significance of regulatory regime** - The statutory position strongly reinforced the correctness of the conclusion that the drivers were providing services to Uber, not the other way round. ULL was the PHV operator for the purposes of the [Private Hire Vehicles (London) Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB9C790E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ecaaaf9acf01492b94473c1ecee74bb0&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the regulations made under it. It was ULL which had to satisfy the licensing authority that it was a fit and proper person to hold a licence; it was ULL alone which could provide bookings; and ULL which was required to provide an estimate of the fare on request. For ULL to inform its statutory regulator that it was operating a PHV service in London, while simultaneously arguing that it was merely an affiliate of a Dutch-registered company which licensed small businesses proprietors to use its software, contributed to the air of contrivance and artificiality which pervaded Uber's case (paras [87-88](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Were the drivers workers in between accepting assignments?** The tribunal had been entitled to reach the conclusion that drivers were working when they were waiting for a booking and at ULL's disposal as part of the pool of drivers it required to be available within the territory at any one time (paras [99-104](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
