---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:34 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:52 am
---

# AIB Group (UK) Plc v Mark Redler & Co Solicitors [2015] AC 1503

## Summary

It would be a backward step to depart from or re-interpret Lord Browne-Wilkinson's analysis in _[Target Holdings Ltd v Redferns [1996] A.C. 421, [1995] 7 WLUK 293](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7E06E51E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96a4d685dcc345bd963089892cf15718&contextData=(sc.Default))_ of the equitable principles of compensation for breach of trust. In the absence of fraud, it would not be right to impose or maintain a rule that gave redress to a beneficiary for loss which would have been suffered even if the trustee had properly performed its duties.

## Abstract

The appellant bank (B) appealed against a decision (_[[2013] EWCA Civ 45, [2013] P.N.L.R. 19](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDB8DD190727911E29E9B83039B0BA304/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96a4d685dcc345bd963089892cf15718&contextData=(sc.Default))_) awarding it £300,000 in equitable compensation following a breach of trust by the respondent solicitors (M).

M had acted for B and the borrowers (S) regarding a mortgage advance of £3.3 million. S's property was already subject to a £1.5 million mortgage in favour of another bank (K). B instructed M to pay the advance to discharge the existing mortgage and enable B's mortgage to be registered as a first legal charge. However, M paid approximately £1.2 million to K, which meant there was a shortfall of around £300,000 and B's mortgage was registered as a second charge. The rest of the advance was paid to S. S subsequently defaulted. The property was repossessed and sold by K for £1.2 million, of which B received around £900,000. B claimed that it was entitled to the full amount of its loan less the amount recovered by it. The Court of Appeal, applying the reasoning of Lord Browne-Wilkinson in _[Target Holdings Ltd v Redferns [1996] A.C. 421, [1995] 7 WLUK 293](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7E06E51E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96a4d685dcc345bd963089892cf15718&contextData=(sc.Default))_, asked itself what loss B had actually suffered as at the date of trial and with the benefit of hindsight, and concluded that B had enjoyed less security for its loan than would have been the case had there been no breach of trust.

B submitted that (1) if a trustee misapplied the trust fund, he had to immediately reconstitute the fund in full, and if he failed to do so, the court would order him to reconstitute the fund in specie, if possible, or pay the equivalent sum in money so as to produce the same result in financial terms. In Target, where a solicitor wrongly paid out funds to a borrower before obtaining an executed mortgage, he remained liable to restore the fund, but was deemed notionally to have done so and to have paid out the money properly at the moment when the preconditions for an authorised disposal of the fund were met. The instant case was different because M had failed, on discovering their mistake, to pay K the additional sum necessary to redeem its charge. M could and should have done so at the time; (2) the Court of Appeal had failed properly to apply the reasoning in Target to the facts of the case. The case fell within Lord Browne-Wilkinson's statement that "[until] the underlying commercial transaction has been completed, the solicitor can be required to restore to the client account monies wrongly paid away". The underlying commercial transaction in the instant case was never completed because the shortfall in the payment needed to redeem K's charge was never paid.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) B's argument sought to hold M responsible for loss which B would have suffered if M had done what they were instructed to do. That involved treating the unauthorised application of trust funds as creating an immediate debt between the trustee and the beneficiary, rather than conduct meriting equitable compensation for any loss thereby caused. Absent fraud, which might give rise to other public policy considerations not present in the instant case, it would not be right to impose or maintain a rule that gave redress to a beneficiary for loss which would have been suffered even if the trustee had properly performed its duties. It would be a backward step to depart from or re-interpret Lord Browne-Wilkinson's analysis in Target of the equitable principles of compensation for breach of trust. The basic right of a beneficiary was to have the trust duly administered in accordance with the provisions of the trust instrument, if any, and the general law. Where that duty had been breached, the purpose of any remedy was to either put the beneficiary in the same position as if the breach had not occurred, or to vest in the beneficiary any profit which the trustee might have made by reason of the breach. Placing the beneficiary in the same position as he would have been in but for the breach might involve restoring the value of something lost by the breach, or making good financial damage caused by the breach. But a monetary award which reflected neither loss caused nor profit gained by the wrongdoer would be penal, Target followed (see paras [57-66](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) B's argument construed too narrowly Lord Browne-Wilkinson's essential reasoning. When he spoke of completion he was talking about a commercial transaction. M did not "complete" the transaction in compliance with the requirements of the Council of Mortgage Lenders' Handbook. But, as a commercial matter, the transaction was executed or "completed" when the loan monies were released to S. The Court of Appeal had correctly applied the reasoning in Target (paras [73-74](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) A trustee's liability for breach of trust, even where the trust arose in the context of a commercial transaction which was otherwise regulated by contract, was not generally the same as a liability in damages for tort or breach of contract. A trust imposed different obligations from a contractual or tortious relationship, in the setting of a different kind of relationship. The law responded to those differences by allowing a measure of compensation for breach of trust causing loss to the trust fund which reflected the nature of the obligation breached and the relationship between the parties (paras [136-137](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
