---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:51 am
---

# Clough v Killey (1996) 72 P&CR D22

The defendant, a divorcee, and the plaintiff, a married woman, had an affaire. The defendant acquired a farm without any contribution by the plaintiff. The parties occupied the farm. The plaintiff claimed half-share of the proceeds of sale of the farm. The judge decided that the plaintiff was entitled to a one-quarter share in the proceeds of sale of the farm. The Court of Appeal, Civil Division, held that the correct starting point was that the shares in which the farm was, by common intention, to be shared. The judge did not refer to that prima facie starting point and did not give any explanation as to why it should be departed from. There was no justification for such departure. Accordingly, one-half would be substituted for one-quarter in the declaration made by the judge as to the beneficial interest in the proceeds of sale of the farm.

---

It was declared that (a) C held a property on trust for sale and that the net proceeds of the sale on trust were to be 75 per cent to C and 25 per cent to K; (b) K to be appointed an additional trustee; (c) the sale of the property was ordered; (d) C was ordered to pay the second and third plaintiffs, WS and RS, GBP 6,223 plus interest, and (e) costs be awarded against C. C appealed against the award to WS and RS. K cross-appealed claiming a 50 per cent share. The judge had found that C and K were to have set up home in a farm. So that C could obtain a mortgage, K had signed a disclaimer on the understanding that she and C would marry and occupy the property together. The property included a cottage which, when renovated, was to be sold to WS and RS who were K's parents. K gave evidence that she had paid GBP 12,500 into C's bank account and had spent GBP 5,343 on the home. K had also been heavily involved in restoration work on the property. The relationship having broken down, K commenced the instant proceedings claiming a joint beneficial interest in the property having acted on a common intention to her detriment. The property had a current market value of between GBP 140,000 and 150,000. WS and RS claimed that they had spent GBP 6,223 on fixtures and fittings for the cottage which was to be offset against the eventual purchase price and that the sale had been frustrated when C demanded too high a price.

Held, allowing the appeal and the cross-appeal, that (1) there was evidence that K had acted to her detriment and the judge had accepted K's evidence that the express common intention between the parties was that there should have been a joint interest. There was a constructive trust although the case could have been equally well argued on the basis of proprietary estoppel. C should not be allowed to resile from his promise of equal shares, whether or not the common intention had been formed after the acquisition, and K should have a 50 per cent share of the net proceeds, _[Grant v Edwards [1986] Ch. 638, [1986] 3 WLUK 264](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB371FB60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=86117b90d03945028690ea112619c90a&contextData=(sc.Search))_, _[Lloyds Bank Plc v Rosset [1991] 1 A.C. 107, [1990] 3 WLUK 428](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE21B0510E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=86117b90d03945028690ea112619c90a&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 806, [1970] C.L.Y. 1243 followed. Given the express common intention, it was not appropriate to adopt a broad brush approach, assessing K's share on the basis of her labour and actual contribution, _[Eves v Eves [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1338, [1975] 4 WLUK 68](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA2B32D81E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=86117b90d03945028690ea112619c90a&contextData=(sc.Search))_ distinguished, and (2) the judge rejected the frustration argument, but found for WS and RS on a restitutionary basis they had not pleaded, that C had been unjustly enriched. The expenditure had been incurred voluntarily for their own purposes and they had repudiated the agreement to buy the cottage when the relationship between C and K appeared to have broken down. The cottage could have been purchased and then resold if WS and RS had not wanted to live in it themselves.
