---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Don King Productions Inc v Warren [2000] Ch 291

FACTS: Two boxing promoters and managers established a partnership. They assigned to the partnership ‘the full benefit’ of their existing promotional and management agreements with boxers. The exploitation of the agreements was the principal feature of the partnership’s business.  

In fact, the purported assignments were void because agreements for personal services are unassignable (as they depend on the mutual confidence of the boxer and the promoter and manager).  

HELD: The parties clearly intended the partnership to acquire the full benefit of the agreements, but the purported assignments were unsuccessful in that respect; and the only way to give effect to the evident intention of the parties was by way of a trust. Thus, the parties held their respective promotional and management agreements on trust for the partnership.

---

## Abstract

In an action brought by DKP following the dissolution of a partnership entered into by W, K and their respective companies for the promotion of boxing in Europe, a number of preliminary issues fell to be determined, including the effect of an agreement to assign the contracts concluded by each partner with boxers, which were contracts for personal services and expressly non-assignable, to the partnership. It was held ([1998] 2 All E.R. 608) that the entire benefit of the contracts was held by the parties on trust for the partnership. W appealed, contending that the benefit of contracts for the management and promotion of boxing was not "property" within the [Partnership Act 1890](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60EE01D1E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=14001f4475214f349e7f36d8a921646c&contextData=(sc.Default)) and, even if it was, could not be "brought into the partnership stock" or "acquired…on account of the firm" so as to become partnership property within the meaning of s.20 of the Act. He further contended that the judge's construction of the partnership agreements was uncommercial and that, if he were wrong on all those issues, contracts for the promotion of boxing concluded by either partner in the time between the dissolution of the partnership and its winding up were not partnership assets.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that the House of Lords in _[Nokes v Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd [1940] A.C. 1014, [1940] 8 WLUK 4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D914560E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=14001f4475214f349e7f36d8a921646c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ did not hold that the ordinary meaning of "property" was limited, and the issue of whether property was "brought into the partnership stock" or "acquired…on account of the firm" did not turn upon whether it was possible as a matter of law to assign that asset, _[Ambler v Bolton (1872) L.R. 14 Eq. 427, [1872] 7 WLUK 77](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5D75F540E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=14001f4475214f349e7f36d8a921646c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Pathirana v Pathirana [1967] 1 A.C. 233, [1966] 6 WLUK 80](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1A946AD0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=14001f4475214f349e7f36d8a921646c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Therefore, property which was not capable of assignment could still be partnership property within the [Partnership Act 1890 s.20](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I21D5D110E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=14001f4475214f349e7f36d8a921646c&contextData=(sc.Default)). The judge was right to conclude that the benefit of the management and promotion agreements concluded by W or DKP which were still in force at the time of the dissolution of the partnership was held by that partner on trust for the partnership and that the benefit to which the partnership was entitled did not come to an end on dissolution but continued either until the contract expired or was properly disposed of in the winding up of the partnership. Where contracts were concluded with boxers by one partner after the date of dissolution but before completion of the winding up, the benefit of such contracts was also held on trust for the partnership.
