---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Fowler v Barron [2008] EWCA Civ 377

## Summary

A judge had erred in seeking to determine the parties' intentions, in the absence of an express agreement, with respect to the shares in which they owned a property by concentrating on the parties' financial contributions and not having regard to the whole of the parties' relationship. The facts were consistent with the inference of a common intention to share the property in equal shares.

## Abstract

The appellant (F) appealed against an order declaring that the property, in which she and the respondent (B), her former partner, had lived and which had been registered in their joint names belonged beneficially to B.

F and B, who had had an unmarried relationship, had bought the property with the aid of a mortgage that had been taken out in their joint names. B had paid the deposit and the balance of the purchase price. The transfer document did not contain any declaration of trust. B had paid the mortgage instalments and the direct fixed costs of the property such as utility bills. He had also cared for their children whilst F worked. The parties had lived together for a long period until they had separated. The judge accepted B's evidence that, when he had agreed to the property being registered in joint names, he had intended that the property would become F's home by way of survivorship. The judge did not refer to the fact that, according to B, he and F had executed mutual wills each leaving the interest in the property to the other. The judge found that, with the exception of some money that F had saved, she had always spent her income on herself and the children. The judge held that the presumption of a resulting trust applied and the property had to be taken to be held in shares proportionate to the respective contributions to the purchase price, and that F had made no such contributions.

F argued that the judge had wrongly considered resulting trust, rather than common intention constructive trust, to determine whether she had a beneficial interest in the property, and had erred in his approach to her income since he had treated that as purely hers. F contended that the judge should have drawn the inference that the parties' shared intention was that she should have a 50 per cent interest in the property. She submitted that the presumption of a beneficial joint tenancy could not be rebutted simply because she had made no contribution to the costs of acquiring the property. B submitted that he had not correctly understood the significance of the property being in joint names since his only intention was that F should inherit the property if he predeceased her and their relation subsisted at the date of death. B contended that F's maximum share should represent a one-half share of the contribution to the purchase price made by the mortgage to which she was a party.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The judge had erred in seeking to determine the parties' intentions with respect to the shares in which they owned the property by concentrating on the parties' financial contributions. In the absence of an express agreement, the parties' intentions, actual or inferred, with respect to the property had to be ascertained in the light of the whole course of their conduct in relation to it, _[Stack v Dowden [2007] UKHL 17, [2007] 2 A.C. 432, [2007] 4 WLUK 407](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I20AB2C10F4AD11DB93178FA5B02D29F5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=33cd24d9c2cc49edacf358abd3f9b440&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied.

(2) As a matter of law, a presumption of joint beneficial ownership arose from the fact that B and F were joint legal owners, Stack applied. It was open to B to rebut that presumption. There was only circumstantial evidence of the parties' intentions. The relevant intention of each party was the intention that was reasonably understood by the other party to be manifested by that party's words or conduct, _[Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 886, [1970] 7 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF292E20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=33cd24d9c2cc49edacf358abd3f9b440&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied. Thus any secret intention of B that F should only benefit in the event of his death and on the basis that they were then still living together, did not provide the evidential basis for rebutting the presumption, since it was not evidence of the parties' shared intention. B's mistaken belief as to the effect of putting the property into joint names was of no materiality. He had not communicated his belief to F, and there was no basis for saying that it should have been apparent to her. The fact that F had signed the mortgage deed, although she was not expected to make any payment towards the discharge of the mortgage debt, was not inconsistent with the shared intention that she should be a joint beneficial owner. As regards the amount of the parties' contributions, that was not necessarily a critical factor. It could be inferred that F had contributed to the household expenses for which both parties were responsible and the parties had intended that it should make no difference to their interests in the property which party paid for what expense. The proper inference from the execution of mutual wills was that the parties intended each to have an interest. There was no logical reason why F's interest should be equal to a one half-share of the proportion that the mortgage loan bore to the total acquisition cost to the property since the parties could not have expected her actually to contribute to that amount. Accordingly, B had not discharged the onus on him of showing that it was not the parties' shared intention that F should have a one half-share in the property.
