---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Grant v Edwards [1986] Ch 638

Indirect contributions to the purchase price of a house by substantial contributions towards the housekeeping and to the bringing up of children are sufficient to create a beneficial interest in favour of the woman where the property is in the name of the man and a common intention that she should have such an interest exists. P and D commenced a casual relationship in 1967. In July 1969 P gave birth to a child of which D was the father. They decided to live together and in December 1969 a house was purchased. The house was conveyed into the names of D and his brother. D told P her name was not going onto the title because it would prejudice pending matrimonial proceedings between P and her husband. GBP 1,043 of the purchase price of GBP 5,490 was paid in cash by D. The remainder was raised by means of two mortgages. The mortgage repayments were made by D. After they moved into the house P paid D GBP 6 per week. A second child was born on 13 July 1971. In addition there were two children from P's earlier marriage. From 1972 to 1980 when the relationship broke up P earned similar sums to D out of which she made very substantial contributions to the housekeeping and to the feeding and bringing up of the children. In September 1975 a sum of GBP 1,037 was paid into a building society account in their joint names. The sum represented the balance of insurance moneys paid out for repairs to the house after a fire. P claimed a beneficial interest in the house. The trial judge rejected her claim.

Held, allowing P's appeal, that the court would find a constructive trust giving P a beneficial interest if P was able to establish a common intention between her and D and acted on by her that she should have a beneficial interest in the property. In acting to her detriment the conduct required of P was conduct that she could not reasonably be expected to embark upon unless she was to have an interest in the house. In the present case the common intention of the parties that P was to have a beneficial interest in the house was established by the excuse given by D to P for not putting her name on the title of the house; such an excuse could only have been necessary if it was intended that P should have an interest in the house. It could properly be inferred that P made substantial contributions to the mortgage payments by her contributions towards the housekeeping given that the parties had barely sufficient money when they were both earning similar sums of money. P could not reasonably have been expected to give D such substantial assistance in making the mortgage payments unless she was to have an interest in the house. Accordingly P acted to her detriment on the faith of the common intention of the parties that she should have an interest in the house. P was entitled to a half interest in the house. Mustill L.J. set out a summary of the relevant propositions of law to be applied in such cases (_[Pettitt v Pettitt [1970] A.C. 777, [1969] 4 WLUK 46](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1E6A7910E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e80908052cc24ead992e115f4d754bb5&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 886, [1970] 7 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF292E20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e80908052cc24ead992e115f4d754bb5&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Eves v Eves [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1338, [1975] 4 WLUK 68](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA2B32D81E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e80908052cc24ead992e115f4d754bb5&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Midland Bank Plc v Dobson [1986] 1 F.L.R. 171, [1985] 1 WLUK 367](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I779D85F0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e80908052cc24ead992e115f4d754bb5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).
