---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:49 am
---

# Guest v Guest [2020] EWCA Civ 387

## Summary

In a proprietary estoppel claim where a farmer's son had established an equity in the family farm where he had worked for over 30 years for low pay in reliance on his parents' assurances that he would inherit a proportion of the farm, the judge had been entitled to find that the appropriate remedy, in order to achieve a clean break where there had been a breakdown in family relations, was a lump sum payment to the son, even though that meant selling the farm.

## Abstract

The appellant parents appealed against a judge's finding that, where the respondent son had established an equity in the family farm, a clean break had to be achieved by means of a lump sum payment to the respondent.

The appellants had made wills in 1981 under which the respondent and his brother would inherit the farm property and dairy farming business equally. On leaving school in 1982, the respondent worked for at least 60 hours per week at the farm for a low wage. In 1989, he moved into a cottage on the farm. In 2012 the respondent's brother, who had previously indicated little interest in farming, entered into partnership with the appellants to run the farm. In 2014, the relationship between the parties broke down. The appellants made new wills, excluding any entitlement for the respondent beyond his right to occupy the cottage. In 2015 the appellants offered the respondent terms for carrying on farming under a farming business tenancy (FBT), but he felt unable to accept those terms on the grounds of affordability. In 2017, the appellants gave the respondent notice to quit the cottage. The respondent brought a claim based on proprietary estoppel. The judge found that the appellants had made an assurance over many years that the respondent would inherit a substantial share of the farm, and that he had reasonably relied on that assurance, working hard on the farm for many years for little financial reward. Considering unconscionability, the judge found that the respondent had established an equity in his favour. On remedy, he held that the breakdown in family relations meant that a clean break had to be achieved by means of a lump sum payment to the respondent consisting of 50% of the market value of the dairy farming business and 40% of the value of the farm buildings.

The appellants challenged the remedy. They submitted that the judge should have asked what an objective bystander must have thought the owner had intended to avoid an unconscionable result, and that the judge should have reached a remedy based on the increased value of the farm. Further, they argued that alternative remedies were more appropriate, such as compensating the respondent with a sum representing the extent to which the value of the farm had increased as a result of his contribution or limiting the relief to the grant of an FBT.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

In proprietary estoppel, the ingredients necessary to raise an equity were an assurance of sufficient clarity, reliance by the claimant on that assurance, and detriment to the claimant in consequence of their reasonable reliance, _[Davies v Davies [2016] EWCA Civ 463, [2017] 1 F.L.R. 1286, [2016] 5 WLUK 436](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC6CEC5501DB311E6A630C2C001ED2AFE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e3005523d2242398e7c3517b872acff&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The objective of a remedy was to avoid a result which was unconscionable. An unconscionable result would normally appear to be so to an objective bystander. The bystander, however, had to consider all the circumstances, including the expectations of and detriment to the claimant. They did not look at the matter solely through the owner's eyes. The appellants' test, which asked what the bystander would have thought the owner to have intended to avoid an unconscionable result, risked skewing the exercise in a manner not supported by authority. The court also rejected the argument that the judge was bound to relegate the respondent to a remedy based on the increased value of the farm, because an objective bystander would not have thought it unconscionable if the appellants had sold the farm and gone on a spending spree and left whatever remained to the children in equal shares. That cut across the judge's findings in relation to the components of the proprietary estoppel. The judge found that a clear assurance had been given to the appellant that he would inherit a sufficient interest in the farm to enable him to farm there. That assurance had been acted upon. As a result, the appellant had given up the possibility of being able to pursue a successful career elsewhere. The assurances had been relied upon for over 30 years. Finally, the judge had held that, by repudiating that assurance and effectively disinheriting the respondent, the appellants had acted unconscionably. Selling the farm and dissipating the assets was something that the objective bystander would regard as unconscionable. As for the alternative remedies proposed, compensating the respondent by a sum representing the extent to which the value of the farm had increased as a result of his contribution paid no regard to the nature of the assurance, but focused entirely on what the appellants had gained as a result of promising something which they had not subsequently delivered. Similarly, it would require a factual enquiry which was not undertaken at the trial. It was also inappropriate to approach compensation based on the respondent's loss of opportunity to work elsewhere. In a case where the respondent had performed his side of the bargain, it was fair to take what he had been promised as a rough proxy for what he had lost. When he came to remedy, the judge had directed himself to the appropriate authorities, and had been entitled to take the respondent's expectation as a strong factor in deciding how to satisfy the equity. As to the argument that there was only ever an expectation that he would inherit upon the appellants deaths; there was no prospect of the parties continuing to work and live together in close proximity. Deferral would perpetuate the situation. The judge had been well aware that the need for a sale was a sad consequence of the breakdown in relations and was part of what was necessary to avoid an unconscionable outcome. Finally, the judge had been right not to limit the appellant's relief to the grant of the FBT, which came nowhere near satisfying the equity in the instant case. The FBT offered had been for a fixed term with no guarantee of renewal (see paras [47, 77-90](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).
