---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:48 am
---

# Parris v Williams [2008] EWCA Civ 1147

## Summary

The decision in _[Lloyds Bank Plc v Rosset [1991] 1 A.C. 107, [1990] 3 WLUK 428](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE21B0510E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_, particularly the express guidance from Lord Bridge, represented the correct approach as to what a claimant to a beneficial share under a constructive trust needed to show in order to claim that beneficial interest. That approach rejected the "bargain theory" derived from _[Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 886, [1970] 7 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF292E20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Midland Bank Plc v Dobson [1986] 1 F.L.R. 171, [1985] 1 WLUK 367](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I779D85F0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_.

## Abstract

The appellant (P) appealed against a declaration that he held a property on trust for the respondent (W) absolutely and against a direction for sale of the property with vacant possession.

P and W were former business partners and friends. In 1998 P had bought two adjacent flats, both of which had separate title numbers but which, at the time of purchase, had no dividing wall and were occupied as one property. The flats were registered in P's name. P's case was that he had bought them, renovated them, reinstated the dividing wall and let them both out. W's case was that he and P had bought them as a joint venture at a time when W had been subject to an individual voluntary arrangement, and that although W had not contributed to the purchase price, he had paid half the renovation outgoings, fully decorated both flats, and paid the annual maintenance charge on one flat. At the first instance hearing, it was held that P and W had reached an informal agreement at the time of the purchase to have an equal interest in the properties. The recorder concluded that it was unconscionable for P to go back on that agreement after accepting W's help in decoration and after receiving maintenance payments for seven years, which had induced W to think that he did have an interest in the property. He ordered that W was entitled to the whole beneficial interest in one of the flats.

P submitted that as there had been no express agreement at the time of the formation of the common intention as to precisely what W had to do to earn his beneficial interest, his claim to have acquired such an interest had to fail.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

The recorder had directed himself entirely correctly and P was wrong to say that an express agreement was needed in order to prove that W had earned his beneficial interest, _[Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 886, [1970] 7 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF292E20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Midland Bank Plc v Dobson [1986] 1 F.L.R. 171, [1985] 1 WLUK 367](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I779D85F0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ not applied, and _[Lloyds Bank Plc v Rosset [1991] 1 A.C. 107, [1990] 3 WLUK 428](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE21B0510E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Grant v Edwards [1986] Ch. 638, [1986] 3 WLUK 264](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB371FB60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5d02a1f24f834ad18d3010e264b1959d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. To the extent that there was any tension between the approaches adopted in Dobson and Grant, the decision in Rosset put the correct principle beyond doubt. Lord Bridge, with the agreement of all their Lordships, identified in that case basic points of principle that had been advanced by way of express guidance to trial judges, even though what Lord Bridge said was strictly obiter. It was plain from Rosset that once a finding of an express arrangement or agreement had been made, all that the claimant to a beneficial share under a constructive trust needed to show was that he or she had "acted to his or her detriment or significantly altered his or her position in reliance on the agreement". That approach significantly rejected any suggestion derived from Gissing or Dobson that it was necessary to show that the arrangement or agreement involved the making of a bargain between the parties and that the claimant had performed his part of that bargain. Lord Bridge had expressed himself in a way that left no scope for the continuing existence of the "bargain theory" emanating from earlier authorities.
