---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:48 am
---

# Pilkington v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1964] AC 612

1. Nothing in the [Trustee Act 1925 s.32](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I383CFC30E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=34521fd90af9427b97b3ef01b8c93cdc&contextData=(sc.Default)) restricts the manner or purpose of advancement under the power thereby conferred. If the whole provision made is for the benefit of the beneficiary advanced, it is no objection to the exercise of the power that other persons benefit incidentally as a result of the exercise. The money can be applied by way of settlement on the beneficiary or may be paid to him on condition that he settles it, and neither course involves any unauthorised delegation of the trust. The advancement need not be "personal" to the beneficiary in the sense of serving any immediate need of his.
2. An advancement directly into a new settlement is to be treated for the purposes of the rule against perpetuities in the same way as a special power of appointment, and so for this purpose the trusts of the new settlement must be read back into the original settlement. Per Viscount Radcliffe: "There does remain at all times a residual power in the court to restrain or correct any purported exercise that can be shown to be merely wanton or capricious and not to be attributable to a genuine discretion."A share of a trust fund was held on protective trusts for X during his life and then for X's issue as he should appoint and in default for his children at 21 or (being daughters) earlier marriage. X had three children, one of them, Y, being a daughter of 5 1/2. The trustees applied to the court asking whether in exercise of the statutory power of advancement they could appropriate half Y's prospective share to be held by them on trust to apply the income for her maintenance until she was 21, then to pay it to her until she was 30, then to transfer the capital to her, or if she died under 30 to hold it on trust for her children at 21, with an ultimate trust for X's other children.

Held, that a new settlement could be made in this way, but not upon the trusts proposed, which were contrary to the rule against perpetuities _[Lowther v Bentinck (1874-75) L.R. 19 Eq. 166, [1874] 12 WLUK 52](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE8079740E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=34521fd90af9427b97b3ef01b8c93cdc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Joicey, Re [1915] 2 Ch. 115, [1915] 5 WLUK 32](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICE1597B1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=34521fd90af9427b97b3ef01b8c93cdc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Halsted's Will Trusts, Re [1937] 2 All E.R. 570, [1937] 4 WLUK 22](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I96163080E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=34521fd90af9427b97b3ef01b8c93cdc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Ropner's Settlement Trust, Re, Re [1956] 1 W.L.R. 902, [1956] 5 WLUK 52](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8F84F0D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=34521fd90af9427b97b3ef01b8c93cdc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Collard's Will Trusts, Re [1961] Ch. 293, [1961] 2 WLUK 114](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I898F2C51E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=34521fd90af9427b97b3ef01b8c93cdc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.
