---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:47 am
---

# R. (on the application of Independent Schools Council) v Charity Commission for England and Wales [2012] Ch. 214

## Summary

It was for the trustees of independent schools to determine how those schools were to be run as charitable trusts and guidance issued by the Charities Commission in relation to the public benefit requirement contained in the Charities Act 2006 was erroneous and would have to be corrected.

## Abstract

The court was required to determine an application for judicial review by the claimant council (ISC) in relation to Guidance issued by the defendant Commission on the public benefit requirement contained in the [Charities Act 2006 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69488D70754411DB8071C6D7F7AFDBBF/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc4a31621944490da944731f9eb589aa&contextData=(sc.Search)) and [s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6240680754511DB8071C6D7F7AFDBBF/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc4a31621944490da944731f9eb589aa&contextData=(sc.Search)). It was also required to determine a reference by the Attorney General regarding the operation of charity law in relation to independent schools.

The Commission had a duty under the Act to issue guidance regarding its objective of promoting awareness and understanding of the operation of the public benefit requirement. The guidance focused on two stated principles of public benefit: there had to be an identifiable benefit and that benefit had to be to the public or a section of the public. Charity trustees were to have regard to the guidance when exercising their powers and duties. The ISC, an organisation representing over 1,200 schools, considered the Commission's guidance to be erroneous and over-prescriptive and claimed that it should not usurp the function of the school trustees in determining how the purposes of a charity should be furthered. It sought an order quashing the parts of the guidance which provided that, where benefit was to a section of the public, the opportunity to benefit was not to be restricted by ability to pay fees.

## Held

Judgment accordingly.

(1) The courts had adopted an incremental and somewhat ad-hoc approach in relation to what benefited the community or a section of the community. However, it was possible to discern from the authorities two related aspects of public benefit. The first was that the nature of the purpose itself had to be such as to be a benefit to the community; the second was that those who might benefit from the carrying out of the purpose had to be sufficiently numerous and identified in such a manner as to constitute a section of the public, _[Oppenheim v Tobacco Securities Trust Co Ltd [1951] A.C. 297, [1950] 12 WLUK 52](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I14459460E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc4a31621944490da944731f9eb589aa&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied. A trust for the advancement of education was not necessarily for the public benefit, even if it was directed to a sufficiently wide section of the community. The terms of a particular trust had to be considered on a case-by-case basis, _[National Anti-Vivisection Society v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1948] A.C. 31, [1947] 7 WLUK 7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0A635E00E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc4a31621944490da944731f9eb589aa&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[Hetherington (Deceased), Re [1990] Ch. 1, [1989] 1 WLUK 700](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBFDE5F10E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc4a31621944490da944731f9eb589aa&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered (see paras [44-53, 62-71](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

The provision of mainstream education in the schools concerned in the instant application was for the public benefit in the first sense. Whether that public benefit was outweighed by disbenefits arising from the charging of fees required a balancing exercise and in the instant case the material before the court had not displaced the conclusion that the nature of the education provided was for the public benefit (paras [94-113](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). However, the further question was whether the class of beneficiaries, those able to afford the fees, was a sufficient section of the community. A charitable organisation which in practice excluded poor people remained a charity; what it had to do was to make some provision for the poor to pass the de minimis hurdle and to provide more than a token benefit. On that basis, the guidance stating that a person's exclusion because of an inability to pay would not have aims that were for the public benefit was wrong. If the guidance should not be read in that way, it was ambiguous and confusing and should be clarified.

The guidance stating that there was a practical requirement that people who could not afford to pay had to be able to benefit in some other material way was obscure and problematic. The guidance required a level of benefit which the Commission considered to be reasonable and which went beyond that which was necessary. However, that was not a requirement. Although it was necessary that there be more than a token benefit, once that low threshold was reached, what the trustees decided to do in the running of a school was entirely up to them, subject to acting within the range within which trustees could properly act. That was entirely different from imposing on trustees anyone else's view about what was reasonable.

In some circumstances, it might be that the trustees would be acting properly if they provided a quite modest benefit for the poor in excess of the de minimis level. The public benefit requirement would then be fulfilled. The Commission's error was to view the public benefit test as satisfied if, and only if, the provision for the poor was reasonable. **It was not a question of reasonableness; it was a question of the proper exercise of the trustees' powers**. The principle that the opportunity to a section of the public to benefit had not to be unreasonably restricted by an ability to pay fees, and that people in poverty had not to be excluded, was wrong. It followed that the guidance based on those principles should be corrected (paras [224-236](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(2) The court answered the questions referred by the Attorney General (paras [237-258](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
