---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:46 am
---

# Relfo Ltd (in liquidation) v Varsani [2014] EWCA Civ 360

## Summary

A judge had been entitled to find that a liquidator was entitled to repayment of funds transferred from a company by its former director to a business associate. The judge had been entitled to infer that the transactions between the relevant banks and accounts were causally linked, and that the company's monies were the source of the monies paid to the business associate.

## Abstract

The appellant (V) appealed against a decision (_[[2012] EWHC 2168 (Ch)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I645BBB40D84211E1826F9E9D7BA9DAB9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=09389229f6ee4e1db26d56f12c7afeea&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the respondent liquidator (L) of a company (R) was entitled to repayment of misappropriated funds on the basis of knowing receipt and unjust enrichment.

R's former director (G) had close business links with V's family. The Revenue had been pursuing R for an outstanding tax liability. G caused a sum of £500,000 to be paid into the Latvian bank account of another company (M). That transaction left R insolvent. The same day, an entity, Intertrade, transferred the US dollar equivalent of £500,000 from a Lithuanian bank account to V's bank account. Two payments totalling $930,000 had also been made into Intertrade's account on that day. A week later, US $100,000 was paid from V's account to G. The judge found that G was dishonest and that he had been concerned with rectifying trading losses he had caused V's family. He found that the monies were substitute property for monies belonging to R which had been misappropriated and paid to M. He accepted L's argument that he could draw an inference that the Intertrade payment was R's money, and found that V had had the requisite knowledge. Accordingly, he held that R was entitled to trace the R/M payment into the Intertrade payment to V. He also held that, if wrong in that respect, V had been unjustly enriched at R's expense, as the enrichment satisfied the "but for" test, namely that V would not have been enriched if the R/M payment had not been made.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) The judge had been entitled to draw the inference that R's monies had not only passed into Intertrade's account but were the source of the monies paid to V, _[El-Ajou v Dollar Land Holdings Plc (No.1) [1993] 3 All E.R. 717, [1992] 6 WLUK 188](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5C9ED150E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=09389229f6ee4e1db26d56f12c7afeea&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The judge had plenty of material from which to draw that inference. He referred to the similarity in amount and timing of the payment to M and the Intertrade payment, the fact that the amount paid to V was the same as the amount of the R/M payment, the fact that V had given no consideration for that payment, and the fact that G had authorised the payment from R's account intending that it should lead to a payment to V. G's intention alone would not be enough to make the Intertrade payment substituted property for the purposes of the tracing rules, but could be a relevant factor in the drawing of such an inference. In any event, that intention was not a major part of the evidence on which the judge had based his inference. Once the judge made the inference that R's money was substituted by payments used ultimately to make the Intertrade payment, it was an inevitable conclusion that the payment to M and the Intertrade payments were causally and transactionally linked. When funds were transmitted through the banking system, what mattered was that there had been an exchange of the value of the claimant's property into the next property for which it was substituted, and so on down the chain of substitutes, _[Foskett v McKeown [2001] 1 A.C. 102, [2000] 5 WLUK 521](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA89140C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=09389229f6ee4e1db26d56f12c7afeea&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Monies held on trust could be traced into other assets even if those other assets were passed on before the trust monies were paid to the person transferring them, provided that that person acted on the basis that he would be reimbursed. In order to trace money into substitutes, it was not necessary that the payments should occur in chronological order, or any particular order. The court had to establish whether the likelihood was that monies could have been paid at any relevant point in the chain in exchange for a promise of reimbursement. There was no reason in logic, or in principle, why that particular way of proving a substitution should be limited to payments to or by correspondent banks, or why the substituted product of a claimant's money could not be traced through any number of accounts. Tracing enabled a beneficiary to recover misappropriated trust property. The innocence of the recipient would go to the question of whether he was a bona fide purchaser for value and without notice; V could not establish that he had given value for the payment, Foskett applied (see paras [56-66](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (2) If that conclusion was wrong, the question was whether, on the facts as found by the judge, R would succeed on a claim for unjust enrichment even though V had not received the benefit of the Intertrade payment directly from R. It was effectively agreed that liability required more than a "but for" test to be satisfied where the claimant contended that the defendant was enriched through third party intervention. However, any principle for unjust enrichment against indirect recipients would have to be refined in later cases. In the instant case, on the judge's unappealed findings, the facts that the Intertrade payment was a gratuitous benefit to V, and that G's objective had been to confer a benefit on V by a circuitous route, made V's enrichment unjust. As a matter of substance, or economic reality, V was a direct recipient, _[Investment Trust Companies (In Liquidation) v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2012] EWHC 458 (Ch), [2012] S.T.C. 1150, [2012] 3 WLUK 102](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I608FE21064C611E19D49AFFC521314F1/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=09389229f6ee4e1db26d56f12c7afeea&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [69-84, 96-97](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
