---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:36 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:45 am
---

# Southwell v Blackburn [2014] EWCA Civ 1347

The claimant and the defendant were romantically involved. The defendant assured the claimant that if she and her two young children moved into his house, they would always have a secure home there. In reliance on this assurance, the claimant and her children moved into the house. The relationship between the claimant and the defendant subsequently deteriorated, and the defendant excluded the claimant and her children from the house. The claimant brought a proprietary estoppel claim and was awarded £28,500. The court held that she had acted to her detriment by (amongst other things) giving up a secure rented home which she had spent some £15,000 to £20,000 fitting out and furnishing.

---

## Summary

A woman who had given up a secure tenancy to move into a house owned by her partner was entitled, on the breakdown of their relationship, to an enforceable equity by reason of proprietary estoppel on the basis of his assurances that she would have a home for life.

## Abstract

The appellant (S) appealed against an order that he pay £28,500 to the respondent (B) following the breakdown of their relationship.

S and B had met in 2000. B had limited resources and was living in a secure tenancy, having spent some £15,000 on fittings and furnishings. She and S set up home together in 2002 in a house purchased in S's sole name. The purchase was funded with capital from S plus a mortgage on which S made the monthly payments. B claimed that the purchase had been completed in S's sole name for convenience, and that they had always intended to be joint owners. S disagreed, claiming that while he had been prepared to offer B a home for as long as the relationship lasted, he had always intended to be the sole owner of the house. When the parties separated in 2012, B claimed that S held the house on a constructive trust for both of them in equal shares. The judge rejected that claim, finding it unlikely that S had made any clear promise about shared ownership. However, he upheld her alternative claim to an enforceable equity of £28,500 by reason of proprietary estoppel. He found that S had assured B that she would always have a home, promised her secure rights of occupation, and told her that he was making a long-term commitment to provide her with a secure home. He concluded that without those assurances B would not have given up her secure tenancy to move in with S. He acknowledged that benefits had accrued to B during the relationship, but found that because the benefits did not all flow in one direction, she did not have to give credit for them. He took account of the fact that she had lost security and money upon moving in with S, and he valued that loss at £28,500.

S submitted that the judge had erred in finding that (1) he had made assurances which were specific enough to engage the doctrine of proprietary estoppel; (2) B had suffered detriment in reliance on those assurances, since any detriment she might initially have incurred had been dissipated by reason of the benefits accruing to her over the course of the relationship; (3) he had acted unconscionably in denying B the benefit she expected to receive.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) For a representation to found a claim based on proprietary estoppel, it had to be clear and unequivocal, _[Thorner v Major [2009] UKHL 18, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 776, [2009] 3 WLUK 645](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8E1C97A019BF11DEA1DA8C6F6885A133/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8a4ddd8b47424b1d8f80173c7f3c0104&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. However, the court had to take a broad approach directed at ascertaining whether it would be unconscionable for a party to deny that which he had allowed or encouraged another to assume, _[Taylor Fashions Ltd v Liverpool Victoria Trustees Co Ltd [1982] Q.B. 133, [1979] 2 WLUK 209](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICE3BA0D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8a4ddd8b47424b1d8f80173c7f3c0104&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The thrust of the judge's findings was that S had assured B that she would have rights that would be recognised in the event of the breakdown of the relationship, just as a wife's contribution to the assets of a marriage would be recognised if the marriage broke down. Moreover, just because S had avoided giving any assurance as to equal ownership of the house, it did not follow that he could not have given any assurance about B's rights of occupation. The two were not inconsistent (see paras [7-11](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) There was no reason to interfere with the judge's conclusions on detriment. Detriment had to be evaluated over the course of the relationship, and the judge had rightly recognised that he had to have regard to the benefits accruing to B as a consequence of her relationship with S, _[Gillett v Holt [2001] Ch. 210, [2000] 3 WLUK 214](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAEF3ED50E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8a4ddd8b47424b1d8f80173c7f3c0104&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Jones v Watkins [1987] 11 WLUK 299](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5DE74FC0F93811E08A4FB9BBBB2DE25A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8a4ddd8b47424b1d8f80173c7f3c0104&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. However, he found that S had also benefitted from the relationship, and that B had incurred losses upon entering into it. He concluded that it would be unconscionable for S to do anything other than return B to much the same position as she had been in before they moved in together. He had been wise not to try to evaluate benefits which flowed both ways. Moreover, the benefits accruing to B were the incidents of the relationship and did not result from her reliance on S's promises. The essence of those promises was that B should have a home for life, and she had spent money and given up a secure home on the strength of them (paras [12-19](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) Unconscionability permeated all the elements of proprietary estoppel rather than being a discrete feature of it. S's third submission was premised on the argument that the judge had lost sight of the fact that the parties were cohabitants whose relationship had not been expected or intended to endure indefinitely. However, by focusing on the relationship, S had lost sight of the nature of his promises and B's detrimental reliance on them. The detriment to B was not that she embarked on a relationship with S, but that she had abandoned her secure home to invest what little else she had in a home to which she had no legal title. It was the detrimental reliance that made the promise irrevocable and led to the conclusion that repudiation would be unconscionable (para.[20](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
