---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:36 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:44 am
---

# Tito v Waddell (No 2) [1977] Ch 106

The use of the word "trust" in relation to the Crown in connection with a transaction to which the Crown is party does not necessarily create a trust in the sense of imposing a fiduciary obligation upon the Crown as opposed to a governmental obligation unenforceable in the courts.

In 1900 and thereafter the Crown granted to a British company an exclusive licence to mine phosphates on Ocean Island, a British settlement. In 1907 it was stipulated that royalties of 6d. per ton would be payable and such royalties were paid, ultimately, to the Government of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony. The mining land on the island was mostly owned in small plots by individual Banabans. After initial difficulties caused by restrictions upon purchasing land from native landowners, the 1913 agreement was reached where under specified areas of land were to be leased to the company together with mining rights, the company agreeing, inter alia, to pay 6d. per ton in royalties, the interest whereon was to be distributed as annuities to the lessors and to replant the spent land "whenever possible." Leases executed pursuant to the agreement contained a covenant to replant the land "as nearly as possible" to its former state with such trees "as shall be prescribed" by the resident commissioner. In 1920 the rights of the company vested in three commissioners representing the governments of the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand to which countries the phosphates were to be allotted on a non-profit-making basis. Subsequently the commissioners' proposals to acquire further land were rejected by the islanders; in consequence the resident commissioner was in 1928 empowered by ordinance to compulsorily acquire the land, any compensation or royalties in respect thereof being held by the commissioner "on trust" for the former landowners, any such royalties to be prescribed by the commissioner. Pursuant thereto in 1931 the resident commissioner acquired 150 acres of land which he leased to the commissioners upon terms, inter alia, that royalties be payable and held "on trust" for the Banabans. (The lease failed to provide for royalties to be paid for the benefit of former landowners.) A 1937 Ordinance provided that the resident commissioner should receive royalties and apply the same to the benefit of the islanders. Some funds were employed to purchase for the Banabans an alternative island whereon they in fact settled. In 1947 the commissioners acquired the remaining mining lands from the Banabans who were ignorant as to the real value thereof and received no expert advice. In 1948 the islanders agreed to the commissioners removing sand and shingle "from the beach" on the island in return for an annual payment. Subsequent requests by the islanders for increases in the royalty payments were largely not granted. In an action against the Attorney General representatives of the Banabans claimed that the Crown had owed and did owe a fiduciary duty to the islanders, inter alia, in respect of the fixing of royalty payments and that the Crown should accordingly pay the accrued difference between the royalties actually paid and the higher "proper" rates. A number of landowners further claimed against the commissioners and the Attorney General for (a) conversion of sand removed from the land, (b) specific performance of the obligation to replant the land, and (c) a declaration that the government, as governor of the colony, was bound to prescribe the trees to be planted.

Held,

(1) that the use of the word "trust" in ordinances or agreements did not impose a fiduciary duty upon the Crown but rather connoted a governmental obligation which the courts could not enforce;

(2) that the "beach" in the 1948 agreement extended to include such areas adjacent thereto as were more akin to the foreshore than to the hinterland; that in any event the claim in respect of removal of sand was time-barred;

(3) that the replanting obligation under the 1913 agreement was binding upon the commissioners by application of the doctrine of pure benefit and burden, but that the obligation was limited to doing only what was reasonably practicable; the resident commissioner's failure to prescribe the trees and shrubs afforded no defence to the claim but neither was such duty to so prescribe a contractual obligation enforceable by the courts; that although specific performance would lie to enforce the replanting obligation, it would not be decreed since all relevant landowners were not before the court; that accordingly the plaintiffs were limited to compensation in damages which would be nominal since they had failed to prove that their loss was the cost of replanting as opposed to diminution in the value of the land by reason of non-performance of the covenant. ( _[Kinloch v Secretary of State for India in Council (1882) 7 App. Cas. 619, [1882] 5 WLUK 50](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID46A1371E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=612f9dbac47241eeb155371e1f31263f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Halsall v Brizell [1957] Ch. 169, [1956] 11 WLUK 118](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB91A0A80E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=612f9dbac47241eeb155371e1f31263f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Wilson v Northampton and Banbury Junction Railway Co (1873-74) L.R. 9 Ch. App. 279, [1874] 2 WLUK 52](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I01D52970E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=612f9dbac47241eeb155371e1f31263f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Wigsell v School for the Indigent Blind Corp (1882) 8 Q.B.D. 357, [1882] 1 WLUK 45](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0076AAE0E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=612f9dbac47241eeb155371e1f31263f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).
