---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:23 am
---

# Abbey National v Cann [1991] 1 AC 56

The relevant date for determining the existence of an overriding interest was the date of registration of the estate rather than the date when the estate was transferred or created. However, a person claiming an overriding interest by virtue of actual occupation had to be in actual occupation at the time of the creation or transfer of the legal estate.

In May 1984 D1 applied to P for a loan to be secured by a mortgage of a leasehold house which he proposed to buy, stating that the property, which was registered land, was for his sole occupation. In fact he intended it to be occupied by his mother, D2, and D3, who was to become her husband. P made a formal offer of loan which D1 accepted, contracts were exchanged on July 19, 1984, the completion being fixed for August 13. On August 6, P put a cheque for the loan in the hands of D1's solicitors, and prior to August 13, D1 executed a legal charge in favour of P to secure the sum loaned. On August 13, completion of the purchase took place and the charge was executed. D2 and D3 then occupied the property. On September 13, 1984 D1 was registered as sole proprietor and P as proprietors of the charge. D1 then defaulted and P commenced proceedings against him and D2 and D3. D1 took no part in the proceedings and D2 and D3 claimed that because of D2's contribution to the purchase price and an assurance by D1 that she would always have a roof over her head, D2 had equitable interest that by virtue of her actual occupation had taken priority over P's charge and was binding on P as an overriding interest pursuant to the [Land Registration Act 1925 ss.23(1) and 70(1)(g)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60CA4D30E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default)) . The judge made an order for possession and the Court of Appeal dismissed D2 and D3's appeal.

Held, dismissing D2 and D3's appeals to the House of Lords, that

(1) the relevant date for determining the existence of overriding interests was the date of the registration of the estate, not the date when the estate was transferred or created, _[Lloyds Bank Plc v Rosset [1989] Ch. 350, [1988] 5 WLUK 143](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE21A8FE0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved and _[Boyle's Claim, Re [1961] 1 W.L.R. 339, [1961] 1 WLUK 851](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I796D3AB0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished;

(2) however, to substantiate a claim to an overriding interest against a transferee or chargee under s.70(1)(g) as a person in actual occupation of the land, the person claiming the overriding interest had to have been in actual occupation at the time of creation or transfer of the legal estate;

(3) where a purchaser relied on a loan to complete his purchase, the transaction of acquiring the legal estate and granting the charge was one indivisible transaction, at least where there had been a prior agreement to grant the charge on the legal estate when acquired. The purchaser at no time acquired the estate free of charge, and so D2 had no overriding interest arising from actual occupation by moving in carpets for some 35 minutes before the time of completion, _[Connolly Bros Ltd (No.2), Re [1912] 2 Ch. 25, [1912] 3 WLUK 92](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8D35C620E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Coventry Permanent Economic Building Society v Jones [1951] 1 All E.R. 901, [1951] 3 WLUK 49](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I57BEF430E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved; _[Security Trust Co v Royal Bank of Canada [1976] A.C. 503, [1975] 12 WLUK 3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FD9D950E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Church of England Building Society v Piskor [1954] Ch. 553, [1954] 3 WLUK 123](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8730F100E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6d554a36038e4680a736ed1d79412e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled and

(4) the judge was entitled to find that the acts of D2 and D3 on the day of completion were merely preparatory, leading to actual residential occupation only after completion. "Actual occupation" involved some degree of permanence or continuity and acts of a preparatory nature, carried out by courtesy of the vendor, could not constitute actual occupation under s.70(1)(g). Moreover, the Court of Appeal was entitled to conclude that D2 had impliedly authorised D1 to obtain the mortgage so as to preclude her from relying on any interest as prevailing over that of P.
