---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:23 am
---

# Baker v Craggs [2018] EWCA Civ 1126

## Summary

The overreaching provisions in the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C08410E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) were not engaged where the conveyance which was said to have an overreaching effect was the grant of an easement over land, and the equitable interest said to be overreached was an interest in the servient tenement, which was under contract for sale to a third party.

## Abstract

The appellant appealed against a decision that the grant of an easement on the sale of one of two adjoining properties operated as a conveyance to a purchaser of a legal estate which overreached the other owner's equitable interest in the servient tenement.

The original owner of the adjoining properties contracted to sell one of them (X) to the appellant but omitted to reserve a right of way over a yard belonging to the other (Y). The sale completed and the appellant went into actual occupation. Registration of the appellant's title was delayed and he lost the benefit of the priority period. In the meantime, the original owner had contracted to sell Y to the respondent and purported to grant him the easement over X which he had failed to reserve on the sale to the appellant. On completion of the sale of Y, the respondent's title was registered with the benefit of the easement over X. The appellant was therefore registered as the proprietor of X, but subject to the easement in favour of Y. The respondent issued proceedings, seeking to determine whether he had the benefit of a right of way over X. The judge held that the grant of the easement to Y was in itself a conveyance to a purchaser of a legal estate which overreached the appellant's equitable interest in X, the servient tenement, and transferred it into a corresponding interest in the sale proceeds of Y.

The issue was whether the doctrine of overreaching in the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C08410E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) was capable of operating where the conveyance alleged to have an overreaching effect was the grant of an easement over land and the equitable interest said to be overreached was an interest in the servient tenement, which was under contract for sale to a third party.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

**Overreaching** - Section 2(1) of the 1925 Act applied only upon a conveyance to a purchaser of a legal estate in land, and although an easement was capable of being a "legal estate" in the nomenclature of the 1925 Act, it was not a "legal estate in land". By virtue of [s.1(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38BE6130E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) of the 1925 Act, the only estates in land capable of subsisting or being conveyed were an estate in fee simple absolute in possession or a term of years absolute. Accordingly, the doctrine of overreaching could only apply where such an estate in land was conveyed to a purchaser. The grant of an easement to a purchaser of land was not a conveyance of a legal estate in land within the meaning of s.1(1). Instead, it was the grant of an interest over land which, if granted for an interest equivalent to an estate in fee simple absolute in possession or a term of years absolute, was the grant of a "legal estate" within the meaning of [s.1(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38BE6130E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) and [s.1(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38BE6130E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) of the 1925 Act. Although s.2(1) used the expression "legal estate in land", which could at first sight be read as including the grant of an easement by reference to the separate definitions in the 1925 Act of "legal estate" on the one hand and "land" on the other, that was not a tenable interpretation if s.2(1) was read in its context. The reference to a conveyance to a purchaser "of a legal estate in land" in s.2(1) was naturally read as a reference to a conveyance of one of the two types of estate in land which, pursuant to s.1(1), were capable of being conveyed at law, _[Edwards v Kumarasamy [2016] UKSC 40, [2016] A.C. 1334, [2016] 7 WLUK 298](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I21B86BA048DF11E6A8FE8AB96BBE49F9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search))_ followed. If the draftsman had intended s.2 to extend to the grant of a legal easement, that would have been made clear. The purported grant of the easement over X could not prevail over the appellant's right to be registered as the proprietor of X free from the easement, because a bare trust arose on the completion of the appellant's purchase and his equitable interest in X under that trust was protected by his actual occupation. It was therefore an overriding interest under the [Land Registration Act 2002 s.29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I70F55B30E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) and [Sch.3 para.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I383A6420E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)), which could not be defeated by the subsequent grant of the easement to Y. It followed that the judge had erred in concluding that the grant of the easement was capable of engaging the overreaching provisions in s.2(1) (see paras [3-5, 24-27, 31](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Attachment of equitable interest to sale proceeds** - Even if the appellant's equitable interest had been overreached, it was not possible to identify any part of the sale proceeds of Y to which that interest could have attached. Overreaching occurred where the relevant sale proceeds or capital were paid to at least two trustees or a trust corporation, typically in accordance with [s.27](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38CC6AF0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9aaa6cce6ef1412eb14099de609e3ea7&contextData=(sc.Search)) of the 1925 Act. However, the appellant had no prior interest in the grant of the easement to the respondent and was not a party to the sale to him; nor was there any apportionment of the sale proceeds paid by the respondent which were specifically attributable to the grant of the easement. There was therefore no basis on which to argue that the appellant's interest in the yard as part of the servient tenement could be translated into an interest in part of the purchase price of the dominant tenement sold to the respondent (para.[32](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
