---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:22 am
---

# Billson v Residential Apartments Ltd [1992] 1 AC 494

Where a landlord peaceably re-entered without the benefit of a court order the tenant could still apply for relief against forfeiture. Tenants, RA, appealed against a decision that they were not entitled to relief from forfeiture and which ordered them to deliver up possession of the premises concerned, ([1991] 3 W.L.R. 264). In breach of covenant, RA had made substantial alterations to the property without the written permission of the landlords, B. Having served notice as required under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.146(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3970E850E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7127a97d0ebb45ec957882016ad1c6ea&contextData=(sc.Search)), 14 days later at 6 am, B peaceably re-entered the premises for a period of four hours without first obtaining a court order. RA retook possession. The Court of Appeal had held that RA's failure to respond to the s.146(1) notice and B's peaceable reentry barred RA from claiming relief against forfeiture. At the centre of the dispute was whether RA's rights under s.146(1) were circumscribed by B's re-entry.

Held: Appeal allowed. It was settled law that a landlord, who had repossessed a property having issued a writ and obtained judgment, would not have to face a claim from his former tenant for relief aginst forfeiture, unless the tenant had successfully set aside or appealed against it. To decide upon the extent of a tenant's rights, if the landlord had not taken those steps, the court turned its attention to the terms of s.146(2) of the 1925 Act. In this exercise it referred to the line of reasoning which culminated in Packwood Transport Ltd v 15 Beauchamp Place Ltd (1977) P. & C.R. 112 . The court was of the opinion that Packwood should be distinguished because it only applied where a landlord had obtained judgment. Lord Templeman concluded that the purpose of s.146(2) was to provide a tenant with an opportunity to obtain relief in whatever way and whenever the lease was determined. He was not restricted to the currency of the notice to make his application because at that stage it was not obvious if the landlord would take proceedings to recover the premises or effect re-entry. If a landlord had re-entered the premises, it was for the court, in all the circumstances of the case, to decide whether relief was appropriate. The practice of granting costs to landlords, on an indemnity basis, where the tenants were unsuccessful was criticised. (_[Quilter v Mapleson (1882) 9 Q.B.D. 672, [1882] 6 WLUK 66](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2E4B9120E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7127a97d0ebb45ec957882016ad1c6ea&contextData=(sc.Search))_, _[Rogers v Rice [1892] 2 Ch. 170, [1892] 4 WLUK 38](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89AE7EB0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7127a97d0ebb45ec957882016ad1c6ea&contextData=(sc.Search))_, _[Pakwood Transport v 15 Beauchamp Place (1978) 36 P. & C.R. 112, [1977] 7 WLUK 115](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I195470C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7127a97d0ebb45ec957882016ad1c6ea&contextData=(sc.Search))_ distinguished).
