---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:22 am
---

# Billson v Residential Apartments Ltd [1992] 1 AC 494 1

**ACTS**: The landlord served a s146 notice for unauthorised alterations requesting the breaches to be remedied 'within a reasonable time…in so far as they are capable of remedy'. Fourteen days later, in the early hours of the morning, the landlord’s agents peaceably re-entered. When the tenant applied for relief, the Court of Appeal held that, as forfeiture had already been accomplished, there was no power to grant the tenant relief.

**HELD**: The Court of Appeal’s decision was reversed by the House of Lords: relief can still be given under s 146(2) even after peaceable re-entry though, in the exercise of the court’s discretion, regard will be had to all the circumstances, including the speed with which the tenant applies for relief. The tenant must apply for relief within a reasonable time after peaceable re-entry.

Lord Templeman sets out clearly the circumstances in which the tenant may apply for relief after a s 146 notice has been served on him, depending on whether the landlord has used court proceedings or peaceable re-entry…

**LORD TEMPLEMAN** …By the common law, when a tenant commits a breach of covenant and the lease contains a proviso for forfeiture, the landlord at his option may either waive the breach or determine the lease. In order to exercise his option to determine the lease the landlord must either re-enter the premises in conformity with the proviso or must issue and serve a writ claiming possession. The bringing of an action to recover possession is equivalent to an entry for the forfeiture. …

Section 146(1) prevents the landlord from enforcing a right of re-entry or forfeiture by action or otherwise so that the landlord cannot determine the lease by issuing and serving a writ or by re-entering the premises until the tenant has failed within a reasonable time to remedy the breach and make reasonable compensation. Section 146(2) enables the tenant to apply to the court for relief where the landlord "is proceeding, by action or otherwise" to enforce his right of re-entry or forfeiture. If the landlord "is proceeding" to determine the lease by issuing and serving a writ, the tenant may apply for relief after the writ has been served. If the landlord "is proceeding" to determine the lease by re-entering into possession, the tenant may apply for relief after the landlord has re-entered.

The tenant may apply for relief where the landlord is "proceeding, by action or otherwise" to enforce his rights. The tenant may apply for relief where the landlord is "proceeding" by action and also where the landlord is proceeding "otherwise" than by action. This can only mean that the tenant may apply for relief where the landlord is proceeding to forfeit by re-entry after the expiry of a section 146 notice. …

Parliament cannot have intended that if the landlord employs the civilised method of determining the lease by issuing and serving a writ, then the tenant will be entitled to apply for relief, but if the landlord employs the dubious and dangerous method of determining the lease by re-entering the premises, then the tenant will be debarred from applying for relief.

The right conferred by section 146(2) on a tenant to apply for relief against forfeiture may without violence to the language, be construed as a right to apply "where a lessor proceeds, by action or otherwise" to enforce a right of re-entry. So construed, section 146(2) enables the tenant to apply for relief whenever and however the landlord claims that the lease has been determined for breach of covenant. I have no doubt that this was the object and intention and is the effect of section 146.

…I accept that it is now settled law that a tenant cannot apply for relief after the landlord has recovered judgment for possession and has re-entered in reliance on that judgment. But I do not accept that any court has deprived or is entitled to deprive a tenant of any right to apply for relief if the landlord proceeds to forfeit otherwise than by an action instituted for that purpose. … The results of section 146 and the authorities are as follows. A tenant may apply for appropriate declarations and for relief from forfeiture under section 146(2) after the issue of a section 146 notice but he is not prejudiced if he does not do so. A tenant cannot apply for relief after a landlord has forfeited a lease by issuing and serving a writ, has recovered judgment and has entered into possession pursuant to that judgment. If the judgment is set aside or successfully appealed the tenant will be able to apply for relief in the landlord's action but the court in deciding whether to grant relief will take into account any consequences of the original order and repossession and the delay of the tenant. A tenant may apply for relief after a landlord has forfeited by re-entry without first obtaining a court order for that purpose but the court in deciding whether to grant relief will take into account all the circumstances, including delay, on the part of the tenant. Any past judicial observations which might suggest that a tenant is debarred from applying for relief after the landlord has re-entered without first obtaining a court order for that purpose are not to be so construed.

---

Where a landlord peaceably re-entered without the benefit of a court order the tenant could still apply for relief against forfeiture. Tenants, RA, appealed against a decision that they were not entitled to relief from forfeiture and which ordered them to deliver up possession of the premises concerned, ([1991] 3 W.L.R. 264). In breach of covenant, RA had made substantial alterations to the property without the written permission of the landlords, B. Having served notice as required under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.146(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3970E850E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=29ed26c0ee4e415da0c0a7d7aaf65dba&contextData=(sc.Search)), 14 days later at 6 am, B peaceably re-entered the premises for a period of four hours without first obtaining a court order. RA retook possession. The Court of Appeal had held that RA's failure to respond to the s.146(1) notice and B's peaceable reentry barred RA from claiming relief against forfeiture. At the centre of the dispute was whether RA's rights under s.146(1) were circumscribed by B's re-entry.

Held: Appeal allowed. It was settled law that a landlord, who had repossessed a property having issued a writ and obtained judgment, would not have to face a claim from his former tenant for relief aginst forfeiture, unless the tenant had successfully set aside or appealed against it. To decide upon the extent of a tenant's rights, if the landlord had not taken those steps, the court turned its attention to the terms of s.146(2) of the 1925 Act. In this exercise it referred to the line of reasoning which culminated in Packwood Transport Ltd v 15 Beauchamp Place Ltd (1977) P. & C.R. 112 . The court was of the opinion that Packwood should be distinguished because it only applied where a landlord had obtained judgment. Lord Templeman concluded that the purpose of s.146(2) was to provide a tenant with an opportunity to obtain relief in whatever way and whenever the lease was determined. He was not restricted to the currency of the notice to make his application because at that stage it was not obvious if the landlord would take proceedings to recover the premises or effect re-entry. If a landlord had re-entered the premises, it was for the court, in all the circumstances of the case, to decide whether relief was appropriate. The practice of granting costs to landlords, on an indemnity basis, where the tenants were unsuccessful was criticised. (_[Quilter v Mapleson (1882) 9 Q.B.D. 672, [1882] 6 WLUK 66](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2E4B9120E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=29ed26c0ee4e415da0c0a7d7aaf65dba&contextData=(sc.Search))_, _[Rogers v Rice [1892] 2 Ch. 170, [1892] 4 WLUK 38](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89AE7EB0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=29ed26c0ee4e415da0c0a7d7aaf65dba&contextData=(sc.Search))_, _[Pakwood Transport v 15 Beauchamp Place (1978) 36 P. & C.R. 112, [1977] 7 WLUK 115](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I195470C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=29ed26c0ee4e415da0c0a7d7aaf65dba&contextData=(sc.Search))_ distinguished).
