---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:22 am
---

# Bull v Bull [1955] 1 QB 234

The rights of equitable owners in common are the same as the rights of legal owners in common, save only for such differences as are necessarily consequent on the interest being equitable and not legal. When there are two equitable tenants in common of land, then, until the land is sold, each of them is entitled concurrently with the other to possession of the land and to the use and enjoyment of it. and neither of them is entitled to turn the other out. If the two tenants in common fall out the land must be sold and the proceeds of sale divided between them. If in such a case the trustees for sale in whom the legal estate is vested cannot get the consent to the sale of both tenants in common, they must apply to the court under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38CF9F40E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=410a7143d9fc4db59235ad30ae3d1f63&contextData=(sc.Default)) . The court can make such order as it thinks fit and this may include an order to turn out any tenant in common who is unwilling to give up possession. In 1949 the plaintiff and his mother, the defendant, between them purchased a dwelling-house. The plaintiff provided the greater part of the purchase-money and the conveyance was made out in his name, it being the intention of the parties that the house should be a home for both of them. In 1953 the plaintiff married and it was arranged that the mother should have two rooms in the house. Soon afterwards differences arose between the mother and her daughter-in-law and in consequence the plaintiff gave the mother notice to quit. The mother refusing to leave, the plaintiff brought proceedings for possession of the two rooms, contending that the mother had a mere licence and the licence having been revoked by the notice to quit she was a trespasser. The county court judge held that the mother was an equitable tenant in common and could not be ejected by the plaintiff.

Held, on appeal, the plaintiff, although he was the legal owner of the house, had no right to turn the mother out. She had an equitable interest which entitled her to remain in the house as tenant in common with him until the house was sold; if they fell out the house should be sold and the proceeds divided between them; the house could not be sold with vacant possession unless she consented to it; if she unreasonably refused her consent, the plaintiff could obtain an order for sale and in aid of it the court could order the mother to go, on such terms as to alternative accommodation as it thought right to impose; the appeal must be dismissed. ( _[Cowper v Cowper 24 E.R. 930, [1734] 1 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF6EF32A0E57011DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=410a7143d9fc4db59235ad30ae3d1f63&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Warren, Re [1932] 1 Ch. 42, [1931] 3 WLUK 15](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF074EB70E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=410a7143d9fc4db59235ad30ae3d1f63&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).
