---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:22 am
---

# Davies v Jones [2009] EWCA Civ 1164

## Summary

An understanding was not a sufficient basis for a finding that a purchaser of land was subject to the burden of a contract, having taken the benefit of it. Where the benefit and burden were said to arise from land, the relevant transaction had to be effected by a deed or other document and whether such a burden was imposed was a matter of the proper interpretation of the document.

## Abstract

The appellant (L) appealed against a decision allowing the extension of a preliminary issue and answering the preliminary issue as extended in a way adverse to L.

The respondent trustees (D) were the owners of land which they contracted to sell to a purchaser (J). J had contracted to sell the land to a supermarket (L). The land had been the site of a garage and it was necessary to remove various buildings and fittings and clear the site. Site clearance and preparation works were to be effected by J. On completion L was to be entitled to retain £100,000 from the purchase price until completion of those works and if they were not so completed L might carry them out itself and retain the costs of so doing from the retention. The contract between J and D contained similar provisions in clause 18 under which J was to be entitled to retain half the costs of the purchaser's works from a retention of £100,000. J assigned the benefit of his contract with D to L and the contract between J and L was determined. The contract between D and J was completed by a transfer direct from D to L and the payment by L to D of the sum due less the £100,000 retention. The purchaser's works under the contract between J and D were completed by L and D contended that the proper cost of those works was £30,000 and sought release of the retention from L. L claimed that the works had cost in excess of £200,000 and that it was not bound by clause 18 of the contract between J and D. D obtained permission to amend to add trust claims against L and a preliminary issue was ordered to be tried as to whether the retention was subject to a trust in L's hands. The judge decided that issue in favour of L but allowed the preliminary issue to be extended and held that L, having taken the benefit of the contract between J and D, was bound to accept the burden and observe the terms of clause 18.

D submitted that the rights of L were derived successively from the deed of assignment and the transfer executed on completion by D; the receipt of the benefit of the assignment by the subsequent transfer was conditional on L's performance of J's obligations under the contract between J and D; such conditionality was sufficient to impose on L the burden of complying with the provisions of clause 18 of the latter contract.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The judge was wrong to hold that L was bound by the terms of clause 18 of the contract between J and D because it took a benefit under that contract. Whether or not an instrument or transaction had created a conditional benefit or a burden annexed to property depended on the proper construction of the instrument or transaction in question, _[Tito v Waddell [1977] Ch. 106, [1976] 11 WLUK 194](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6448350E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f1c17bd93cfd42eeaec88f7f2e0f57dc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Rhone v Stephens [1994] 2 A.C. 310, [1994] 3 WLUK 266](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I86132F80E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f1c17bd93cfd42eeaec88f7f2e0f57dc&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The "clear understanding" which the judge found to exist that L would take the benefit of the contract was insufficient. An understanding could not confer benefits or impose burdens. What was required was a transaction having legal effect. In the instant case the benefit and burden were alleged to arise from land. Accordingly the relevant transaction had to be effected by a deed or other document. The deed of assignment did not purport to impose any burden on L. There was nothing in the deed of assignment from which it would be possible to find by implication an undertaking or requirement imposed on L to carry out J's obligations. Accordingly the questions whether acceptance of the benefit was conditional on performance of the burden and whether L had sufficient opportunity to disclaim or reject the benefit did not arise. Likewise the transfer which completed the contract did not impose any relevant obligation on L. In the absence of a covenant in the transfer binding L to perform J's obligations under clause 18 they could not be imposed on L but remained the obligations of J alone. L was entitled to a declaration that it was not obliged to observe the terms of clause 18.

(2) The judge should not have permitted the extension of the preliminary issue. The necessary amendment of the particulars of claim would not be within [CPR r.17.4(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEAED80B1E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f1c17bd93cfd42eeaec88f7f2e0f57dc&contextData=(sc.Default)) because it would have added a new claim after the limitation period expired which did not arise from the facts originally pleaded. As a matter of discretion the judge should have refused permission to amend the claim and preliminary issue on account of the lack of any properly formulated amendment, the lateness of the application and the fact that earlier similar amendments had been refused.
