---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:22 am
---

# Davies v Directloans Ltd [1986] 1 WLR 823

## Abstract

A credit bargain was not extortionate within the meaning of the [Consumer Credit Act of 1974 s.138](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I49841771E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75642d34252845e38dcd7c0076443622&contextData=(sc.Default)) where the borrower had been warned of the cost of the credit and where the risk taken by the lender justified the rate of interest charged and the rate was not out of line with that charged by other lending bodies. On August 1, 1979 P, after consulting solicitors, entered into a deferred sale agreement with D and became entitled to enter into occupation of a house which they were contractually bound to purchase in 12 months' time, with payment of interest meanwhile on the balance of the purchase price. They fell behind in their interest payments, but on September 2, 1980 completed the purchase and executed a charge over it to pay D the principal sum lent of GBP 17,450 plus interest at the rate of 25.785 per cent per annum over 10 years. They missed instalments, tried and failed to sell the house, and in January 1982 D started possession proceedings. In March P found a buyer and in April the house was transferred and the mortgage redeemed. D made no charge for interest on arrears of instalments. In May 1984 P brought proceedings seeking an order that the rate of interest stipulated under the legal charge be reduced to a proper rate on the grounds that the loan and terms of repayment constituted an extortionate credit bargain within the meaning of s.138 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974, that the rate of interest was "grossly exorbitant," and that the circumstances surrounding the loan and the charge "grossly contravenes ordinary principles of fair trading." The claim failed.

Held, that it was for the court to determine whether a credit bargain was "extortionate" and the meaning of the word was confined to the meaning given in s.138 (dictum of Browne-Wilkinson J. in _[Multiservice Bookbinding Ltd v Marden [1979] Ch. 84, [1977] 5 WLUK 65](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0940AFF0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75642d34252845e38dcd7c0076443622&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered). On the evidence P could not rely on their lack of business experience or financial pressure as relevant factors since they had been warned by independent solicitors and D that a mortgage would be expensive, and no advantage was taken of them by D. The degree of risk, accepted by D on the security offered was a relevant factor and justified the rate of interest charged, since P had found difficulty in obtaining a building society or other institutional loan. As to the remaining factor set out in s.138, namely prevailing interest rates, regard should be had to the true rate of interest, i.e. the annual percentage rate of charge calculated in accordance with the Consumer Credit (Total Charge for Credit) Regulations 1980 even though they did not apply to the loan in question. A comparison of rates charged by other lending bodies showed that the payments required of P fell far short of constituting the legal charge an "extortionate credit bargain" under s.138 or one which "grossly contravened" the principles of fair dealing (dictum of Sir John Donaldson in _[Wills v Wood (1984) 81 L.S.G. 1211, [1984] 1 WLUK 808](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAA402B70E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75642d34252845e38dcd7c0076443622&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).
