---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:21 am
---

# Federated Homes v Mill Lodge Properties Ltd [1980] 1 WLR 594

Where there is a restrictive covenant which relates to or touches and concerns the covenantee's land, the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.78(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38F046A0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=40645991a17a4bb09b41f483796e238f&contextData=(sc.DocLink)) does not merely provide a shorthand for shortening a conveyance; it has the effect of annexing the benefit of the covenant to the covenantee's land.

X Co owned a site containing three parcels of land, the red, the green, and the blue. They obtained planning permission to develop the site, by the erection of a specified number of dwellings. X Co sold the blue land to D Co They imposed a restrictive covenant that D Co should not build more than 300 dwellings on it, so as not to reduce the number of dwellings X Co might build under the planning consent on the retained land. The retained land was described as "any adjoining or adjacent property" returned by X Co and included both red and green land. P Co ultimately became owners of both red and green land after various intermediate purchasers. The green land carried an unbroken chain of express assignments of the benefit of the covenant; the red land did not. D Co obtained planning permission to develop the blue land to a higher density than 300 dwellings. P Co sought to restrict them from carrying out the development. The judge held that the green land claimed the benefit of the covenant, but that the red land did not. On appeal by D Co, held, dismissing the appeal, that since the covenant was for the benefit of the retained land and the land was sufficiently described in the conveyance for the purpose of annexation, the covenant related to, or touched and concerned, the land, and the Law of Property Act 1925 s.78(1) annexed the benefit of the covenant to every part of the land. Accordingly, the benefit of the covenant ran with the red land, and P Co were entitled to enforce it as owners both of the green and the red land. (_[Shelfer v City of London Electric Lighting Co (No.1) [1895] 1 Ch. 287, [1894] 12 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA79278F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=40645991a17a4bb09b41f483796e238f&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ and Smith v River Douglas Catchment Board [1947-51] C.L.Y. 10592 applied; dictum of Romer L.J. in _Drake v Gray [1936] 1 All E.R. 363, [1936] 2 WLUK 78_ considered).
