---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:21 am
---

# Fred Perry v Genis [2015] 1 P&CR DG5

## Summary

A court granted the creditor an order for the sale of the debtor's matrimonial home under the [Trusts of Land and Appointment of Trustees Act 1996](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FCB53C0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)). Whilst the Act gave no guidance as to the weight to be attached to the competing interests of the parties and any children living in the home, case law and statute appeared to give precedence to the commercial interests of a creditor rather than to the residential security of the family.

## Abstract

The claimant creditor (P) applied for an order for the sale of the family home of the defendant husband (H) and wife (W).

P had obtained judgment against H for selling counterfeit goods under P's brand. P obtained three charging orders over the property. There was sufficient equity in the property to pay off the indebtedness to P, and H and W were not in a position to make any other offer to clear the debt. The property was in the sole name of H, however W had contributed to the purchase and claimed a beneficial interest. Further, W had registered her "home rights" not to be evicted or excluded from the property under the [Family Law Act 1996 s.30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I90D318B0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)) and had therefore obtained a charge on H's freehold legal estate under [s.31(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38F9E390E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)). H and W lived with their children, aged 9 and 14, who both attended specialist Jewish schools in the vicinity of the property.

## Held

Application granted.

(1) Although the legal estate was vested in H alone, the property was held beneficially by both H and W. As such, P's application for an order for sale fell under the provisions of the [Trusts of Land and Appointment of Trustees Act 1996](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FCB53C0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)). In deciding whether to order a sale, the court had to consider the matters listed in [s.15(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7917D40E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)) of that Act. Those included the purposes for which the property was held, the welfare of any minor who occupied the property and the interest of any secured creditor. No guidance was given as to the relative weight to be given to those matters. The interest of P and those of W and the children were not readily commensurable. The latter were all innocent victims of H's business failure whereas P was pursuing its own entirely legitimate interests in the recovery of the amount due to it. The authorities demonstrated a recurring tension between those competing claims, but seemed to give precedence to commercial interests rather than to the residential security of the family, _[Bank of Ireland Home Mortgages Ltd v Bell [2001] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 920, [2000] 12 WLUK 77](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6ECD3291E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered. The ultimate primacy of financial interests appeared to have received legislative confirmation in the conclusive right given to a trustee in bankruptcy to obtain an order for sale under the [Insolvency Act s.335A](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID790B9F1E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)). There might be cases where an order for sale could be viewed as a disproportionate interference with the rights of the family under the [ECHR](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)). However, in cases such as the instant where P could only be repaid if the house was sold, it was difficult to see any disproportionate action. If the case fell solely to be dealt with under s.15, P should therefore succeed (see paras 6-10 of judgment).

(2) The court also had to consider W's home rights under the Family Law Act. Those could be restricted or terminated in P's favour under [s.34(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFDF89640E44E11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)) if it was just and reasonable to do so having regard to all the circumstances including, under [s.33(6)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFDF561F0E44E11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5e24033c97bb441ab2731b1b53fa1217&contextData=(sc.Search)), the housing needs, financial resources and the likely effect of any order on the wellbeing of the parties or any relevant child. Those were different considerations from those listed in s.15. There was no reported case on their application in the current context, but the balance fell in favour of W and her children given their housing needs and financial resources. However, to give precedence to W's home rights would create an anomaly which could not be justified. It would mean that W would be treated differently from a spouse or partner who did not have the benefit of such registered rights and whose case was dealt with under s.15. It was just and reasonable to give priority to P, only in the sense that like cases should be dealt with in the same way, and because of the underlying policy of the law shown in cases such as Bell (paras 11-14).

(3) As there was no alternative means by which P could recover the debt, an order for sale must necessarily follow, but the court could seek to temper the effect of the order. The order for sale would be deferred for one year to enable H, W and their children to make arrangements for new schools and alternative accommodation (para. 14).
