---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:31 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:21 am
---

# Glass v Kencakes [1966] 1 QB 611

1. The fact that a covenant that premises shall only be used in a certain manner is broken by a sub-tenant of the lease does not render the breach incapable of remedy; the fact that the user involves immorality does not in itself render the breach incapable of remedy provided that the lessees neither knew nor had reason to know of the user. 2. A notice of forfeiture is a bad notice if it does not require the tenant to remedy the breach of covenant, where such breach is capable of remedy.
3. Per curiam: A notice requiring a breach to be remedied "if it was capable of remedy" would be a good notice. The tenants of partly residential and partly business premises sub-let flats to D, who permitted them to be used for the purposes of prostitution. The lease contained a covenant against carrying on a trade or business on the ground floor and that the upper floors should be used as residential flats only. Because of the immoral use of the premises the landlord served notice of forfeiture on the tenants and the premises, alleging a breach of covenant against using the flats for other than residential purposes, that they had been used for a business purpose (prostitution) and that the breach was incapable of remedy. D, when he learnt of the notice, caused the prostitutes to leave the flats. Three weeks later the tenants served notice of forfeiture on D.
5. On a claim by the landlord for forfeiture, held
7. (1) that, there being no evidence that the premises had acquired a bad reputation or declined in value, the breach alleged was capable of remedy, and
9. (2) the notice of forfeiture was bad in that it had not required the tenants to remedy the breach. ( _[Governors of Rugby School v Tannahill [1935] 1 K.B. 87, [1934] 10 WLUK 34](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB2FD67A1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15e3363dbdc542a28837f5a63d105e11&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; Egerton v. Esplanade Hotels (London) [1947-51] C.L.Y. 5370 distinguished; _[Hoffmann v Fineberg [1949] Ch. 245, [1948] 3 WLUK 27](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1969661E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15e3363dbdc542a28837f5a63d105e11&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished and _[Borthwick Norton v Romney Warwick Estates Ltd [1950] 1 All E.R. 798, [1950] 1 WLUK 54](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38F1D270E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15e3363dbdc542a28837f5a63d105e11&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished).
