---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:21 am
---

# Harcus Sinclair v Your Lawyers [2021] UKSC 32

## Summary

A non-compete undertaking given by one law firm to another in the context of a contemplated group action in which one firm undertook not to accept instructions from potential claimants without the other's permission did not constitute an unreasonable restraint of trade. In determining a promisee's legitimate interests for the purposes of assessing whether they had been reasonably protected, it was possible to take account not only of the parties' contractual obligations but also of their non-contractual intentions, assessed objectively at the time the contract was made. The court outlined the components of a "solicitor's undertaking".

## Abstract

In a dispute between two law firms regarding which of them could act for group action claimants, the appellant (Y) appealed against a decision that a non-compete undertaking given by the respondent (H) in a non-disclosure agreement between them was unenforceable.

Y had been instructed to pursue a potential group claim and had been advised to collaborate with a larger law firm with more experience of major group actions. H was such a firm. H's undertaking stated that it would not use Y's confidential information without Y's written agreement and would "not accept instructions for or to act on behalf of any other group of Claimants in the contemplated Group Action without [Y's] express permission". The undertaking was to last six years. There was no formal collaboration agreement, but the parties collaborated informally for several months. H then recruited its own claimants and issued a claim form on their behalf. The parties agreed that the non-compete undertaking engaged the restraint of trade doctrine. The central issue was whether the undertaking was unreasonable and therefore unenforceable. A High Court judge held that the non-compete restriction was not in restraint of trade, was enforceable, and that H had breached it. The Court of Appeal determined that the judge had erred and that the restriction was an unreasonable restraint of trade.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

**Was the undertaking an unreasonable restraint of trade?** The High Court judge had been entitled to conclude that the undertaking was reasonable and the Court of Appeal was wrong to have overturned that decision. Reasonableness required the clause to be both (i) reasonable between the parties (which meant protecting the promisee's interests and going no further than was reasonably necessary to do so), and (ii) not contrary to the public interest.

(i) **Reasonableness between the parties -** The undertaking gave H access to a process of informal collaboration with Y. Both parties agreed that that had been intended. The judge had noted, in that regard, Y's legitimate interests in preventing H setting up a rival group of claimants. The authorities on the restraint of trade doctrine approached legitimate interests almost entirely through the lens of the contractual provisions. However, a legitimate interest did not need to be expressly stated in the agreement. In determining a promisee's legitimate interests, it was possible to take account, not only of the parties' contractual obligations, but also of their non-contractual intentions, assessed objectively at the time the contract was made, _[Allan Janes LLP v Johal [2006] EWHC 286 (Ch), [2006] I.C.R. 742, [2006] 2 WLUK 624](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5CD01850E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Egon Zehnder Ltd v Tillman [2017] EWHC 1278 (Ch), [2017] I.R.L.R. 828, [2017] 5 WLUK 511](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA90998B0455311E78BE3B7D2405E528A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved, _[Pickwell v Pro Cam CP Ltd [2016] EWHC 1304 (QB), [2016] I.R.L.R. 761, [2016] 6 WLUK 73](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF92B13402BBA11E68412A511488CD057/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The Court of Appeal should have taken into account the parties' non-contractual intention to collaborate informally. Further considerations on reasonableness were that the duration of the non-compete clause was reasonable. It was logical and necessary for it to last for a period roughly equating to the claims' limitation period. The restriction was concerned solely with that particular litigation and H was not being restricted in carrying on the rest of its business. The restriction was also commensurate with the benefits to H secured under the contract. The phrase "secured under the contract" was to be given a wide meaning to include the contemplated benefits to H arising from the intended informal collaboration. The court enunciated five further points in support of its conclusion that the judge's decision on reasonableness between the parties should not have been overturned (see paras 48-50, 56-85 of judgment).

(ii) **Contrary to public interest -** As Y had established reasonableness as between the parties, the burden shifted to H to establish that the undertaking was contrary to the public interest. The High Court judge had been entitled to conclude that it was not for the following reasons:

- there was no public policy against a solicitor undertaking not to continue acting for a client. In general, a solicitor was entitled to refuse to act for a particular person.
	
- there was a public interest in law firms knowing that the courts would enforce a reasonable non-compete undertaking.
	
- the restriction was narrow: it operated in respect of one set of claims arising out of one particular set of events.
	
- as there were a number of firms willing and able to run group claims, it was not contrary to the public interest for H to be removed from the pool.

(paras 87-92).

**Was the undertaking a "solicitor's undertaking"?** A solicitor's undertaking involved a promise to do or refrain from doing a certain act. It would often be contractual, but need not be. The mere fact that it was given by a solicitor did not make it a "solicitor's undertaking". The generally accepted test was that the solicitor had to give the undertaking in his or her "capacity as a solicitor" rather than in a personal or business capacity. Giving it in connection with a transaction involving a client or to the court or to a third party were common indicators. If the undertaking required the solicitor to do (or not do) something which solicitors regularly carried out (or refrained from doing) as part of their ordinary professional practice, and if the reason for the undertaking, or the matter to which it related, involved the sort of work regularly carried out by solicitors as part of their ordinary professional practice, it was likely to be a "solicitor's undertaking" in the sense of triggering the inherent supervisory jurisdiction of the court. In the instant case, the undertaking had been given in connection with a business arrangement, not in a professional capacity. The judge had erred in finding that it was a solicitor's undertaking, _[Udall (t/a Udall Sheet Metal & Co) v Capri Lighting Ltd [1988] Q.B. 907, [1987] 3 WLUK 137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF7A7420E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[United Bank of Kuwait v Hammoud [1988] 1 W.L.R. 1051, [1988] 6 WLUK 291](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDFF7E180E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Geoffrey Silver & Drake v Baines (t/a Wetherfield Baines & Baines) [1971] 1 Q.B. 396, [1970] 11 WLUK 46](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1ACB60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Ruparel v Awan [2001] Lloyd's Rep. P.N. 258, [2000] 11 WLUK 638](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I90C734D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f6e9e93650b54f9ca449b1f3e6cd51c5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved (paras 91, 93-124).
