---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:20 am
---

# Hoffman v Fineberg [1949] Ch 245

The defendants conducted the business of a social club on the premises, which they held under a lease. A conviction for gaming being recorded against those managing and frequenting the club, the landlord served a notice under [s 146](https://www.lexisnexis.com/uk/legal/search/enhRunRemoteLink.do?linkInfo=F%23GB%23UK_LEG%23num%251925_20a_SECT_146%25&A=0.104381080431315&backKey=20_T485437777&service=citation&ersKey=23_T485437767&langcountry=GB) of the Law of Property Act 1925 claiming possession for breach of covenant, but he omitted to ask that the breach be remedied. The defendants admitted the breach of covenant, but they contended that the aforesaid omission invalidated the notice. They counterclaimed for relief against forfeiture, and they stated that they were willing to agree to the imposition of any conditions to remedy the breach. The Chancery Division held that the breach was not capable of remedy. Therefore, the notice was valid.

---

The authorities do not lay down any definite test by which it can be decided whether a breach of covenant is "capable of remedy" within the meaning of s.146(1) of the Law of Property Act, 1925, or not. It has been decided that bankruptcy and allowing premises to be used as a brothel constitute breaches which are irremediable. A conviction for allowing gaming to go on in a public place was held to be a breach of a covenant to carry on and conduct a club "in a proper and orderly manner and complying with all legal … regulations", and such breach was held to be irremediable by mere cesser of the conduct constituting the breach, because the lessor was entitled to be protected against the slur which is involved in being said to be the landlord of a gaming house, even though no monetary damage ensued from it. Therefore, the landlord's failure to require the tenant, in the statutory notice served under s.146(1) of the Law of Property Act, 1925, to remedy the breach was immaterial. Semble: a notice under s.146(1) of the Act of 1925 which merely copies out the words of the section and calls on the lessee to "remedy the breach if capable of remedy" is a good notice. Quare: whether a proper test to apply in deciding whether a breach is capable of remedy or not is that any breach involving a criminal offence is a breach which is incapable of remedy ( _[Governors of Rugby School v Tannahill [1935] 1 K.B. 87, [1934] 10 WLUK 34](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB2FD67A1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fe24235e8c54409aa29e8873d558570b&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied; and Egerton v. Esplanade Hotels, London [1947-51] C.L.Y. 5370 applied). The Court's jurisdiction to grant relief against forfeiture under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.146(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3970E850E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fe24235e8c54409aa29e8873d558570b&contextData=(sc.Search)) , is a purely discretionary jurisdiction, which the Court may grant or refuse "having regard to the proceedings and conduct of the parties under the … provisions of the section, and to all the other circumstances". The conditions laid down by Cozens-Hardy, M.R., in _[Hyman v Rose [1911] 2 K.B. 234, [1911] 3 WLUK 115](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC5ABA970E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fe24235e8c54409aa29e8873d558570b&contextData=(sc.Search))_ , on which relief is to be granted, though not to be taken as rules, are useful maxims in general. The most important of these maxims is that "the applicant must come into Court with clean hands, and ought not to be relieved if he avows an intention to continue or to repeat a breach of covenant". In a case where there had been a long continuance of a breach of covenant by allowing premises to be used for the purpose of gaming for a period of over one year, the Court refused to grant relief under the Act, even though the lessees expressed their willingness to comply with any conditions that the Court chose to impose. ( _[Hyman v Rose [1912] A.C. 623, [1912] 7 WLUK 111](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC5ABD080E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fe24235e8c54409aa29e8873d558570b&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied).
