---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:20 am
---

# Horsham Properties Group Ltd v Clark [2009] 1 WLR 1255

## Summary

The court determined that the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.101](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38FCA2B0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not infringe the rights of mortgagors under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Protocol 1 art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7CE4DF876E440C491BF5D88ED57F7DB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) by permitting mortgagees to sell properties without first obtaining a court order for possession. Read as a whole, s.101 of the Act implemented rather than overrode the private bargain between mortgagor and mortgagee.

## Abstract

The claimant company (H) claimed possession of a property formerly belonging to the defendants (B).

B had fallen into mortgage arrears in respect of the property. Pursuant to the mortgage deed and the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.101(1)(iii)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38FCA2B0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) , the mortgagee appointed receivers over the property who contracted to sell it at auction. On sale, the property was transferred to H, who became the registered proprietor. B remained in possession of the property and H instigated the instant claim. The issue for determination was whether [s.101](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38FCA2B0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act, by permitting mortgagees to overreach their rights in relation to the mortgaged property by selling it out of court without first obtaining a court order for possession or sale, infringed the rights of mortgagors under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) .

B submitted that the statutory power under the Act would only be compatible with the Convention rights of residential mortgagors if it was construed as requiring a mortgagee first to obtain a court order for possession or to make an application for an order permitting sale.

## Held

Judgment for claimant.

(1) B had lost the equity of redemption in the property without statutory intervention. The receivers' power to sell the property was derived wholly from the mortgage contract. There was no corresponding power under the Act. On a strict analysis of the facts of the instant case, the issue for determination never arose. However the outcome of such an important question should not remain unanswered and the analysis of the legal position would continue as if s.101 had been engaged.

(2) It was clear that s.101 of the Act served to implement rather than override the private bargain between mortgagor and mortgagee. It was a form of conveyancing shorthand designed to implement the ordinary expectations of mortgagors and mortgagees whilst reducing the costs and delays therein. Section.101 of the Act was expressed to be subject to the doctrine of "contrary intention" pursuant to [s.101(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38FCA2B0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act. Accordingly, s.101 of the Act, read as a whole, was very far removed from the concept of state intervention into private rights through overriding legislation. It was not rigid, arbitrary or discriminatory and its effect was not only apparent on its face but, in the instant case, was spelt out in terms in the mortgage itself, _[Wilson v First County Trust Ltd [2003] UKHL 40, [2004] 1 A.C. 816, [2003] 7 WLUK 303](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I01B852A0E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Ropaigealach v Barclays Bank Plc [2000] Q.B. 263, [1998] 12 WLUK 457](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8F7E6120E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Pennycook v Shaws (EAL) Ltd [2004] EWCA Civ 100, [2004] Ch. 296, [2004] 2 WLUK 271](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DB64440E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The exercise of a statutory power of sale under s.101 of the Act after a relevant default by the mortgagor was not a deprivation of possession within the meaning of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Protocol 1 art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7CE4DF876E440C491BF5D88ED57F7DB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default)) and neither was the exercise by receivers acting under purely contractual powers in overriding B's equity of redemption by contracting to sell the property.

(3) (Obiter) Any deprivation of possession constituted by the exercise by a mortgagee of its powers under s.101 of the Act after a relevant default was justified in the public interest and required no case-by-case exercise of a proportionality exercise by the court. It clearly reflected the bargain habitually and historically drawn between mortgagors and mortgagees, in which the ability of a mortgagee to sell the property offered as a security without having to go to court was identified as an essential aspect of the security necessary if substantial property based security lending was to be available at affordable rates of interest, _[Barclays Bank Plc v Alcorn [2002] EWHC 498 (Ch), [2002] 2 P. & C.R. DG10, [2002] 3 WLUK 233](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6F3EE021E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b0e7e32710748c78af39cde8b77e767&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.
