---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:20 am
---

# International Drilling Fluids Ltd v Louisville Investments (Uxbridge) Ltd [1986] Ch 513

Panel: Fox, Mustill and Balcombe LJJ

**Facts:** A 30-year lease was granted containing a covenant by the tenant not to assign the lease without the landlord’s consent. After 13 years, the current tenant sought to assign the lease, but the landlord refused consent on the grounds that the proposed use of the property (as serviced offices) would have a negative effect on the value of the freehold reversion.

At first instance, the landlord was held to have unreasonably refused consent to the assignment; the landlord appealed.

**LORD JUSTICE BALCOMBE**

From the authorities I deduce the following propositions of law.

The purpose of a covenant against assignment without the consent of the landlord, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld, is to protect the lessor from having his premises used or occupied in an undesirable way, or by an undesirable tenant or assignee …

As a corollary to the first proposition, a landlord is not entitled to refuse his consent to an assignment on grounds which have nothing whatever to do with the relationship of landlord and tenant in regard to the subject matter of the lease: see **Houlder Brothers & Co. Ltd. v. Gibbs**, a decision which (despite some criticism) is binding on this court: **Bickel v. Duke of Westminster [1977] Q.B. 517**. A recent example of a case where the landlord's consent was unreasonably withheld because the refusal was designed to achieve a collateral purpose unconnected with the terms of the lease is **Bromley Park Garden Estates Ltd. v. Moss [1982] 1 W.L.R. 1019.**

The onus of proving that consent has been unreasonably withheld is on the tenant: see **Shanly v. Ward (1913) 29 T.L.R. 714** and**Pimms Ltd. v. Tallow Chandlers Company [1964] 2 Q.B**. 547, 564. [**Note** that the burden of proof has now moved to the landlord to prove that his refusal of consent was reasonable under the**Landlord and Tenant Act 1988**.]

It is not necessary for the landlord to prove that the conclusions which led him to refuse consent were justified, if they were conclusions which might be reached by a reasonable man in the circumstances: **Pimms Ltd. v. Tallow Chandlers Company [1964] 2 Q.B. 547, 564.**

It may be reasonable for the landlord to refuse his consent to an assignment on the ground of the purpose for which the proposed assignee intends to use the premises, even though that purpose is not forbidden by the lease: see **Bates v. Donaldson [1896] 2 Q.B. 241, 244.**

There is a divergence of authority on the question, in considering whether the landlord's refusal of consent is reasonable, whether it is permissible to have regard to the consequences to the tenant if consent to the proposed assignment is withheld. …

[I]n my judgment, the judge reached the right decision. Although he did not expressly mention the disproportionate harm to the tenants if the landlords were entitled to refuse consent to the assignment, compared with the minimum disadvantage which he clearly considered the landlords would suffer by a diminution in the paper value of the reversion - "paper value" because he was satisfied there was no prospect of the landlords wishing to realise the reversion - he clearly recognised the curious results to which the landlords' arguments, based solely upon a consideration of their own interests, could lead.

As he said in his judgment: "It seems to me that, if Mr Lewison is right, the more substantial the lessee, the more easily the landlord would be able to justify a refusal of consent to an assignment, since unless the proposed assignee's covenant was as strong as the assignor's, a reasonable man might form the view that the market would consider the reversion less attractive if the lease were vested in the proposed assignee than if it were vested in the assignor. To take the matter to extremes, if a lease was made in favour of a government department it would be unassignable except to another government department; for… the market would prefer to have the government as the lessee, whether the premises were being used as serviced offices or not, even if they were standing empty, rather than a company, however strong its covenant."

In my judgment, the gross unfairness to the tenants of the example postulated by the judge strengthens the arguments in favour, in an appropriate case of which the instant case is one, of it being unreasonable for the landlord not to consider the detriment to the tenant if consent is refused, where the detriment is extreme and disproportionate to the benefit to the landlord.

I am also satisfied that the judge could, and should, have had regard to the fact that the proposed serviced office user was within the only form of user permitted by the lease.

I have already stated the proposition of law, derived from the cases, that it may be reasonable for the landlord to refuse his consent to an assignment on the grounds of the proposed user, even though that proposed user is permitted by the lease. But it does not follow from that that, in all circumstances, it will be reasonable for the landlord to object to a proposed user which is not forbidden by the lease…

There is all the difference in the world between the case where the user clause prohibits only certain types of use, so that the tenant is free to use the property in any other way, and the case where (as here) only one specific type of use is permitted. In my judgment, in that type of case it is not reasonable for the landlord to refuse consent to an assignment on the grounds of the proposed user (being within the only specific type of use), where the result will be that the property is left vacant and where (as here) the landlord is fully secured for payment of the rent.

**HELD:** The landlord’s refusal was deemed unreasonable as the detriment to the tenant was disproportionate to the benefit to the landlord. In addition, the reason for refusal affected neither the landlord in his capacity as landlord, nor the tenant in his capacity as tenant.

---

Where a proposed assignment would on paper cause a detriment to the landlord's reversion but in the actual circumstances of the case that detriment would not arise a refusal of consent by the landlord to the assignment is unreasonable. P was the tenant of a two-storey office block on Highbridge Industrial Estate under a lease for 30 years from December 25, 1981 which provided for an upwards review of the rent payable every five years. The lease provided that the premises should only be used for office accommodation and prohibited P from assigning the premises without the consent of the landlord, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. D was the owner of the Estate and P's landlord. P being a tenant by way of an assignment, D had the benefit of two direct covenants to pay the rent due under the lease. P occupied the premises as a single office block for its own use but in May 1984 moved to new premises. In August 1984 P applied to D for consent to assign the premises to Euro Business Services. Euro wished to use the premises for the provision of serviced office accommodation to persons requiring office accommodation on a short-term basis. Consent was refused on the ground that the value of D's reversion would be diminished. The trial judge found that the proposed use would not affect the value of the land or building at the end of the lease and nor would it prejudice future rent reviews. There was no significant danger that the rent would not be paid throughout the term. The trial judge also held that it was unreasonable to conclude that the proposed use might affect the value of the premises detrimentally if D sought to sell or mortgage them during the term of the lease but that there was no proper of D taking that course of action. The trial judge declared D's refusal of consent to be unreasonable.

Held, dismissing D's appeal, that although a landlord need usually only consider his own interests in deciding whether or not to consent to a proposed assignment the refusal of consent may be held to be unreasonable where the benefit to the landlord from his refusal is unreasonably disproportionate to the detriment to the tenant. Having regard to the fact that the detriment to D was restricted to the paper value of his reversion and not its actual value to him, consent to the proposed assignment was unreasonable withheld. Although it may be reasonable to refuse consent on the ground of a proposed use that is permitted by the lease where the user covenant restricts use to a specific type it is not reasonable to refuse consent on the grounds of the proposed use where the result would be that the premises are left vacant where the landlord is fully secured for payment of the rent. The court set out seven propositions of law applicable to the granting or withholding of consent to an assignment (_Sheppard v Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp (1872) 20 W.R. 459, [1872] 1 WLUK 3_, _[Houlder Bros & Co Ltd v Gibbs [1925] Ch. 575, [1925] 5 WLUK 10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC3CE8500E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a14c421f3fbe420c9ddbad0577225e07&contextData=(sc.Search))_, _[West Layton Ltd v Ford [1979] Q.B. 593, [1979] 2 WLUK 79](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF8132540E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a14c421f3fbe420c9ddbad0577225e07&contextData=(sc.Search))_, Bromley Park Garden Estates v Moss [1982] C.L.Y. 1710 , _[Leeward Securities Ltd v Lilyheath Properties Ltd (1985) 17 H.L.R. 35, [1983] 11 WLUK 221](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6FDC33C0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a14c421f3fbe420c9ddbad0577225e07&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered; _[Premier Confectionery (London) Co Ltd v London Commercial Sale Rooms Ltd [1933] Ch. 904, [1933] 6 WLUK 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I287FF470E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a14c421f3fbe420c9ddbad0577225e07&contextData=(sc.Search))_ distinguished).
