---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:19 am
---

# Kinch v Bullard [1999] 1 WLR 423

FACTS: Mr and Mrs Johnson were beneficial joint tenants of their home, but their relationship had deteriorated. Mrs Johnson was terminally ill and, to prevent her interest in the property passing by survivorship to her husband on her death, she wanted to sever the joint tenancy in equity. The notice in writing was sent by her solicitors by ordinary post on 3rd August 1995. The husband suffered a serious heart attack on 5th August and was in hospital when the letter arrived. Mrs Johnson had subsequently changed her mind about severance, perhaps because it was now likely that her husband would die before her, and therefore destroyed the letter when it was delivered. Mr Johnson died shortly afterwards and Mrs Johnson died several months later. The executors of both parties asked the court to determine whether and at what point severance had taken place. If it had taken place, each estate had a 50% interest in the property. If it had not, As Mrs Johnson survived Mr Johnson, her estate took ownership of the house. The questions addressed by the court therefore concerned the position where a notice in writing had been sent and delivered, but had not been read by the intended recipient.

HELD: the notice in writing had been ‘given’ or served on Mr Johnson when it had been delivered to his home. Severance took place at that moment so that destruction of the letter had no effect.

NEUBERGER J:

> ‘In light of the provisions of section 36(2) of the Act of 1925, the question as to whether or not the joint tenancy was severed depends on whether Mrs. Johnson “gave” the notice to Mr. Johnson. As a matter of ordinary language, at least on the assumptions I am currently making, the notice was not “given” to Mr. Johnson, because he never received it. …
>
> …As a matter of ordinary language, section 196(3) provides that service of a notice “at the last-known place of abode or business” of the addressee is good service, and there is no suggestion that it matters how that service is effected, i.e. whether it is by the giver of the notice, his agent, courier service, ordinary post, recorded delivery or registered post, or some other method. Provided that it can be established that, irrespective of the identity of the person who delivered the notice to a particular address, it was delivered to that address, then the notice has been validly served at that address, provided that it is the addressee's last-known abode or place of business.’
>
> ‘Once the sender has served the requisite notice, the deed is done and cannot be undone. …
>
> I reach this conclusion based on the proper construction of section 36(2). However, it appears to me that it is also correct as a matter of policy. If it were possible for a notice of severance or any other notice to be ineffective because, between the sender putting it in the post and the addressee receiving it, the sender changed his mind, it would be inconvenient and potentially unfair. The addressee would not be able to rely confidently upon a notice after it had been received, because he might subsequently be faced with the argument that the sender had changed his mind after sending it and before its receipt. … I am inclined to think that the position would be different if, before the notice was “given,” the sender had informed the addressee that he wished to revoke it. In such a case, it appears to me that the notice would have been withdrawn before it had been “given”.’
>
> ‘So far as convenience is concerned, I consider that if section 196(3) is satisfied once it is shown that the relevant document was bona fide delivered to the last-known place of abode or business of the addressee, then, although it might lead to an unfair result in an exceptional case, the law is at least simple and clear. On the other hand, if the court starts implying exceptions to the clear and simple statutory procedure, confusion and uncertainty could result. …
>
> [Section 196] could not be relied on by the sender of a notice as an engine of fraud. The very purpose of serving a notice is to convey information, with legal consequences, on the addressee: it cannot be right that the sender of a notice can take positive steps to ensure that the notice does not come to the attention of the addressee, after it has been statutorily deemed to have been served, and then fall back on the statute to allege that service has none the less been effected. …’

---

A husband, H, and wife, W, occupied the matrimonial home as beneficial joint tenants. W, who was suffering from a terminal illness, was considering divorce and, so that the whole legal and beneficial ownership of the property would not vest in H on her death, decided to serve a notice severing the joint tenancy which, under the proviso to the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.36(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38D40C10E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f09d80b751425ca2097e4e722abc11&contextData=(sc.Default)), would have the effect that the legal title would vest in H on W's death but he would hold the beneficial interest on trust in equal shares for himself and on the trusts of W's will. The notice was signed by W and sent to H at the matrimonial home by ordinary first class post. H, having been admitted to hospital after being taken ill suddenly, was not at home to receive the notice and W, thinking that H might predecease her and having changed her mind about wanting to sever the tenancy, destroyed it. H died a week later and W several months later. H's executors, seeking a declaration that they were entitled to a one half beneficial share of the property or the proceeds of sale, issued proceedings against W's executors, contending that the notice of severance was validly served in terms of s.196(3) of the Act and was therefore effective to sever the joint tenancy.

Held, that H's executors were entitled to the declaration. The notice had been validly served within s.196(3), having been posted to and delivered at H's last known place of abode, even though it had not come to his attention. The fact that W picked up the notice and destroyed it did not invalidate the service. There was nothing in s.36(2) which required a court to inquire into the sender's state of mind and it made no difference that, at the time of service, W no longer wished to sever the tenancy. However, W herself would not have been entitled to claim as against H that the notice had been validly served where she had taken steps to deliberately conceal the notice from him.
