---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:19 am
---

# Kuznetsov v London Borough of Camden [2019] EWHC 805 (Ch)

## Summary

A leaseholder was allowed to continue with his claim that a local authority had entered into a binding contract to purchase the leasehold interest on his flat, as he had a real prospect of establishing at trial that an exchange of correspondence between the parties amounted to an open contract for the sale of his interest that complied with the [Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46addf3e9ae443afb4da7281b0fa466b&contextData=(sc.Default)).

## Abstract

A leaseholder appealed against the striking out of his claim against the local authority landlord.

The leaseholder owned the leasehold interest in a flat on an estate. The local authority owned the freehold of the estate and had obtained planning permission in 2013 to redevelop the site. It made offers to the leaseholder to acquire the flat. The local authority's case was that the offers had come to nothing, that it had made a compulsory purchase order in 2015 authorising the compulsory acquisition of the entire estate, which was confirmed by the secretary of state in March 2017, and that the flat had vested in the local authority pursuant to a general vesting declaration effective from July 2017. Consequently, the leaseholder ceased to hold any right to the flat other than an entitlement to statutory compensation for the compulsory purchase. The leaseholder's case was that the offers had led to the local authority sending him a letter in February 2017 advising him to obtain a "Red Book" valuation on his leasehold interest and stating that it would be willing to purchase the flat at that value. The leaseholder asserted that he wrote his acceptance of the offer on the letter, countersigned it and delivered it by hand to the local authority. In September 2017 he claimed for specific performance on the basis that the local authority had entered into a binding contract to purchase his leasehold interest. A deputy master struck out his claim on the ground that he had failed to demonstrate that the parties had agreed all the essential terms necessary for an agreement for the sale or other disposition of an interest in land required by the [Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46addf3e9ae443afb4da7281b0fa466b&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The leaseholder submitted that the deputy master had erred in applying s.2. He also sought to amend that submission to argue that the February letter was binding in that it reflected and recorded an oral agreement reached with the local authority. He further submitted that in any event it was not necessary to satisfy s.2 because the local authority had completed the contract by taking possession of the flat and because the contract had been one of disposition, both of which rendered s.2 irrelevant.

## Held

Appeal allowed in part.

**Application of s.2 of 1989 Act** - The February letter contained all the terms necessary and essential for a valid open contract. It identified the relevant parties (namely the leaseholder and the local authority), the property that was the subject matter of the contract (namely the leaseholder's interest in the property), and the price, albeit that that was determinable by reference to the "Red Book" valuation that the leaseholder was to obtain. Considering the wording of [s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46addf3e9ae443afb4da7281b0fa466b&contextData=(sc.Default)), if a contract was concluded in the circumstances of the instant case, by an exchange of correspondence, there was no difficulty in saying that it was "made in writing … incorporating all the terms which the parties expressly agreed" by the leaseholder countersigning the letter sent to him, which was signed on behalf of the local authority, and sending it back to the local authority. Obiter comments in _[Stealth Construction Ltd, Re [2011] EWHC 1305 (Ch), [2012] 1 B.C.L.C. 297, [2011] 5 WLUK 588](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I53869310859311E0AE91BF2B176F10D6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46addf3e9ae443afb4da7281b0fa466b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ lent support to the proposition that a hardcopy letter signed by the sender, which itself was signed by the addressee in the context of an exchange of correspondence giving rise to a contract, would satisfy the requirements of s.2, Stealth Construction considered. Accordingly, the leaseholder had a real prospect of establishing at trial that the letter amounted to an open contract for the sale of his leasehold interest in the property and that the contract complied with s.2. In terms of the leaseholder's possible change of case towards an argument that the letter reflected and recorded a prior oral agreement between the parties, that raised issues that were not necessarily straightforward and required more detailed consideration and argument at trial rather than a summary judgment conclusion (see paras 49-64 of judgment).

**Alleged completion of contract** - It was fanciful to suggest that the local authority's act of taking possession pursuant to the general vesting declaration before the leaseholder had asserted a contract existed could ever be construed as representing the completion of the alleged contract. Further, it was impossible to construe the February letter as being a disposition of the property under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.53(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DBD440E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46addf3e9ae443afb4da7281b0fa466b&contextData=(sc.Default)) rather than a contract for disposition under s.2 of the 1989 Act. At best, the letter merely recorded an agreement on the part of the local authority to purchase at some point of time in the future. It would be at that point that any disposition of the property would take place (paras 45-48).
