---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:18 am
---

# Neocleous v Rees [2019] EWHC 2462 (Ch)

## Summary

An automatically generated email footer containing the name, role, and contact details of the sender rendered the document "signed" for the purposes of the [Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 s.2(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default)) so long as the inclusion of the name was for the purpose of giving authenticity to the document.

## Abstract

The claimants sought specific performance of an alleged contract of compromise which involved a disposition of an interest in land.

A dispute had arisen between the claimants and the defendant concerning a right of way. The matter was due to be heard before a tribunal, but prior to the hearing the claimants offered to buy a piece of the defendant's land in order to resolve the issue. Settlement terms were agreed in a series of emails between the parties' solicitors and the matter was compromised. The tribunal was notified and the scheduled hearing was vacated. However, the defendant later claimed that the settlement terms had not been finalised and that the application should be relisted. It was the defendant's case that the alleged contract of compromise failed to comply with the formalities required by the [Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default)) because his solicitor's purported signature was by "automatic" generation of his name, occupation, role and contact details on a footer at the bottom of the email. The issue was whether that "signature" was adequate to render the document "signed" on behalf of the defendant within the meaning of [s.2(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The claimants submitted that the typed name of the sender at the foot of an email, whether entered manually or generated automatically, rendered the document "signed" within the meaning of [s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default)) so long as the inclusion of the name was for the purpose of giving authenticity to the document.

## Held

Judgment for claimants.

**Correct approach to meaning of "signed" -** The defendant's approach to the meaning of "signed", namely that it required a handwritten name (or at least a facsimile of such handwriting), depended on the alleged meaning of that word to the ordinary person. However, the ordinary usage of words had a tendency to develop. Many ordinary people would consider that what was produced when one stored a name in the Microsoft Outlook "Signature" function with the intent that it was automatically posted on the bottom of every email was indeed a "signature". Unless one treated _[Firstpost Homes Ltd v Johnson [1995] 1 W.L.R. 1567, [1995] 7 WLUK 274](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA757FD70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default))_ as authority for the proposition that "signature" meant what an ordinary person would have believed the word to mean at some point in the past, it was not authority for the proposition that the word had any particular meaning beyond that which an ordinary person would understand it to bear, Firstpost considered. In the current age, that would be capable of encompassing the wording in the footer of an email. The sounder guide to whether it was a signature was the test identified in _[J Pereira Fernandes SA v Mehta [2006] EWHC 813 (Ch), [2006] 1 W.L.R. 1543, [2006] 4 WLUK 182](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF97CE3E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and adopted by the Law Commission, namely whether the name was applied with authenticating intent, Mehta applied, _[Stealth Construction Ltd, Re [2011] EWHC 1305 (Ch), [2012] 1 B.C.L.C. 297, [2011] 5 WLUK 588](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I53869310859311E0AE91BF2B176F10D6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Golden Ocean Group Ltd v Salgaocar Mining Industries Pvt Ltd [2012] EWCA Civ 265, [2012] 1 W.L.R. 3674, [2012] 3 WLUK 313](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEBF3A0E06A4711E1B8EBEEACFC18C9DE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=af39c00dcb284b99b18f1b31b5e7cf07&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [51-53](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Effect of automatic addition of words** - Under the settings on the email account, the relevant words were added automatically to every email without any action or intention on the solicitor's part. However, adding that rule and the necessary information in the settings had involved the conscious action of a person. In such circumstances, it was difficult to distinguish between a name which was added pursuant to a general rule set up on an electronic device that the sender's name and other details be incorporated at the bottom from an alternative practice that each time an email was sent the sender manually added those details. Further, the recipient of the email had no way of knowing whether the details were added automatically or manually. Looked at objectively, the presence of the name indicated a clear intention to associate oneself with the email, to authenticate it or to sign it (paras [54-55](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Application to instant case** - For the following reasons, the automatic email footer was a sufficient act of signing:

- Such a footer could only be present because of a conscious decision to insert the contents, albeit that that decision might have been made the subject of a general rule that automatically applied the contents in all cases. The recipient would therefore naturally conclude that the sender's details had been included as a means of identifying the sender with the contents of the email, since such a footer must have been added either as a result of a conscious decision in the particular case or a more general decision to add the footer in all cases.
	
- The sender of the email was aware that their name was being applied as a footer. The recipient had no reason to think that the presence of the name as a signature was unknown to the sender.
	
- The fact that the defendant's solicitor had used the words "Many Thanks" before the footer showed an intention to connect the name with the contents of the email.
	
- The presence of the name and contact details was in the conventional style of a signature, at the end of the document. That contrasted with the name and contact address of the person alleged to have signed the letter in Firstpost, whose name and address appeared above the text of the letter, in the conventional manner of inserting the addressee's details, Firstpost considered (para.[57](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
