---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:18 am
---

# P&P Property Ltd v Owen White [2018] EWCA Civ 1082

Buyers’ solicitors should be aware of the Court of Appeal decision in P&P Property Ltd v Owen  
White & Catlin LLP and Another; Dreamvar (UK) Ltd v Mishcon De Reya and Another [2018] EWCA Civ 1082. Both cases were heard together as they contained similar facts.

In both cases, a fraudulent seller had purported to sell a high value London property to an innocent buyer. In  
fact the fraudsters did not own the properties, but this was not discovered until after the purchase monies had been handed over. The Court of Appeal held that, although there was no negligence on the part of the buyers’ solicitors, they were liable for the losses suffered by their  
buyer clients. This was on the basis that the buyers’ solicitors had received the money from their clients on trust to use for a genuine completion. As there had, in fact, not been a genuine completion, the buyers’ solicitors were in breach of trust. This was despite the fact that, in the Mishcon De Reya case, the seller’s solicitor had not carried out adequate identity checks on its  
own client. The Court held that the seller’s solicitor was not liable in tort to the buyer or its solicitor, as it had no general duty of care to them. However, the buyer’s solicitor could claim a contribution from the seller’s solicitor towards the buyer’s losses, as the previous edition of the Law Society’s Code for Completion by Post (see 30.8.1), which the parties had adopted, required the seller’s solicitor to use the purchase money for a genuine completion.

## Summary

In joined cases concerning solicitors' and estate agents' liability for identity fraud in property transactions, the court determined appeals against judgments relating to negligence, breach of trust, breach of undertaking and breach of warranty of authority. Relief under the [Trustee Act 1925 s.61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38B44F10E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b7d37c51ad45ae8378e3ad4b3e1f85&contextData=(sc.Default)) was denied where the seller's solicitors, although not dishonest, had acted unreasonably by their series of failures to carry out relatively basic checks on the identity of their client.

## Abstract

In joined cases concerning solicitors' and estate agents' liability for identity fraud in property transactions, the court determined appeals against judgments relating to negligence, breach of trust, breach of undertaking and breach of warranty of authority. It also determined an application for relief under the [Trustee Act 1925 s.61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38B44F10E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b7d37c51ad45ae8378e3ad4b3e1f85&contextData=(sc.Default)).

In both cases, a fraudster had posed as a property owner and instructed solicitors and agents to act for him on the sale. In the first appeal, the fraudster instructed his solicitors (O) to sign the contract on his behalf. In both cases, completion took place in accordance with the Law Society Code for Completion by Post (2011) (the Code). The frauds were discovered before registration of title and the purchase monies were lost. In the first appeal, the purchaser claimed against O and the agents on the basis that they had held themselves out as having the authority of a true owner to conclude the sale, had negligently failed to carry out checks to establish their client's identity, and that O had paid the purchase monies to its client without proper authority. Those claims were dismissed. In the second appeal, the purchaser (D) brought claims against its own solicitors (MdR) and the fraudster's solicitors (MMS). The negligence claim against MdR was dismissed but it was held in breach of trust for releasing the purchase monies. Relief under s.61 was refused. The claims against MMS were dismissed. By the instant appeals, D and MdR challenged the finding that MMS was not in breach of trust or undertaking. D also appealed against the finding that MdR was not negligent, contending that it should have obtained an undertaking from MMS only to use the purchase money to complete a true sale of the property.

## Held

Appeals allowed in part, application refused.

**(Gloster LJ dissenting on the s.61 issue)**

**Breach of warranty of authority** - An agent who represented to a third party that he had authority to act on another's behalf was treated as warranting that he had such authority and was liable for any loss sustained by the third party in reliance on that representation, _[Collen v Wright 119 E.R. 1259, [1857] 1 WLUK 242](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3028EBF052C711DCB405845D38D78029/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b7d37c51ad45ae8378e3ad4b3e1f85&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Unlike the situation in Collen, however, O's client who had given them authority to act was not the owner. It was therefore necessary to consider whether O's obligation to carry out checks was in itself sufficient to extend the warranty of authority beyond the mere fact that they were authorised by the person who in fact instructed them. The judge had been wrong to construe the warranty inherent in O's signature of the contract as no more than a guarantee that they had the authority of the client who had instructed them to handle the sale on his behalf. The additional factor in the form of the person instructing O did not override the clear terms of their representation that they acted for the seller. Accordingly, O had warranted that they were authorised to act on behalf of the actual owner of the property. However, it had been open to the judge to find on the evidence that the purchaser in the first appeal had not relied on the warranty, contracts having been exchanged on the basis of his solicitor's belief that the necessary due diligence had been carried out. The claim against O based on breach of warranty of authority therefore failed. The agents' failure to carry out proper checks instead of relying on those done by O was insufficient to impose on them a liability based on a guarantee of their client's identity, since their memorandum of sale which they had prepared on the basis of the particulars given to them by the fraudster pre-dated the contract and was no more than a statement of the details they had been given. (paras 32, 38, 40, 56-57, 61).

**Negligence** - All relevant factors had to be taken into account when considering whether a duty of care was owed by an agent, including that a solicitor providing replies on behalf of his client would often be dependent on the client for the content of those replies, _[Gran Gelato Ltd v Richcliff (Group) Ltd [1992] Ch. 560, [1991] 12 WLUK 86](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB3526570E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b7d37c51ad45ae8378e3ad4b3e1f85&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Since the negligence alleged in the instant appeals was a failure to carry out proper identity checks, any liability arising under the criteria in _[Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605, [1990] 2 WLUK 128](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I821B84F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b7d37c51ad45ae8378e3ad4b3e1f85&contextData=(sc.Default))_ would depend on the solicitors and their agents being under a duty to the purchasers when carrying out those checks, even though the [Money Laundering Regulations 2007](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE25A2C90487B11DC94188F96D9A05541/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b7d37c51ad45ae8378e3ad4b3e1f85&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not create any parallel liability to affected third parties based on a breach of statutory duty. The imposition of liability in negligence towards a third party who was not the solicitor's client clearly required something more than it being foreseeable that his lack of care would cause loss to that third party. Nor was it sufficient that the test of proximity was satisfied, whether by an actual assumption of responsibility or by the existence of a direct interest on the third party's part in the product of the solicitor's instructions. The incremental approach in Caparo required a global assessment, Caparo followed. The solicitors and agents in the instant appeals had not voluntarily assumed responsibility to the buyers for the adequacy of the due diligence they had carried out and they had not been asked to give undertakings or assurances as to the quality of that due diligence. Therefore, it was not fair or reasonable to treat the solicitors and agents as having assumed responsibility to the purchasers for the adequacy of the identity checks (paras 29-31, 71-72, 74, 81-82).

**Breach of trust** - A seller's solicitor acted in breach of trust if he released the purchase money to his client without the buyer's authority. The purchase money was held on a bare trust for the buyer pending completion. The authority of the seller's solicitor to release the money to his client depended upon completion having taken place within para.10 of the Code. Paragraph 3 of the Code, according to which the seller's solicitor acted as agent for the buyer's solicitor on completion, did no more than absolve the seller's solicitor from responsibility as the buyer's agent to investigate possible breaches by the seller of his contract. That paragraph could not be construed as excluding any liability on the part of the seller's solicitor for breach of trust, still less as giving him authority to release the purchase money in the absence of a genuine completion. Both O and MMS had acted in breach of trust when they released the purchase money to their clients (paras 84-86, 88, 97-98).

**Breach of undertaking** - The undertaking in question was contained in para.7(i) of the Code, which provided that the seller's solicitor would obtain the seller's authority to receive the purchase money on completion. "Seller" was not defined in the Code. The undertaking was intended to denote the seller identified in the contract rather than the person actually giving the solicitor his instructions. By agreeing to be bound by the Code, O and MMS had given undertakings to that effect and were therefore in breach of undertaking (paras 112, 118).

**Section 61** - Although O had not acted dishonestly, they could not be said to have acted reasonably. There had been a series of failures to carry out relatively basic checks on the identity of their client. There was no basis for interfering with the judge's decision refusing relief under s.61 (paras 108-109).

**Per Gloster LJ, dissenting** - Given the finding that MMS was in breach of trust, MdR should be relieved of responsibility under s.61. It had not acted dishonestly; primary responsibility for checking the fraudster's identity lay with MMS; the judge below had indicated that, had MMS been found liable, he would have exercised his discretion in favour of granting MdR s.61 relief; there was no suggestion that MMS did not have adequate insurance to cover the loss; and there was no reason to prolong the matter by further contribution proceedings as between MMS and MdR (paras 125-126).
