---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:17 am
---

# Patel v Pirabakaran [2006] 1 WLR 3112

## Summary

The phrase "let as a dwelling" in the Protection from Eviction Act 1977 s.2 meant "let wholly or partly as a dwelling" and so applied to premises that were let for mixed residential and business purposes.

## Abstract

The appellant (T) appealed against a decision that his lease of mixed business and residential premises had been lawfully forfeited by the respondent landlords (L). T conducted a retail business on the ground floor of the premises and resided on the first floor. T fell into arrears and L exercised their right of re-entry in relation to the shop premises. T remained resident in the residential premises. L issued a claim for possession on the basis that as a result of their re-entry of the shop premises the lease had been forfeited. L subsequently excluded T from the residential premises and T issued a claim for an injunction that L should be restrained from excluding him from either part of the premises because under the [Protection from Eviction Act 1977 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FF833C0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default)) the purported forfeiture of the lease was unlawful. The judge found that the demised premises were not let "as a dwelling", that accordingly L were not constrained by s.2 of the 1977 Act, and that therefore the lease had been lawfully forfeited.

Held, allowing the appeal, that

(1) the phrase "let as a dwelling" in s.2 of the 1977 Act meant "let wholly or partly as a dwelling" and so applied to premises that were let for mixed residential and business purposes. When the precursor to s.2 was introduced as the [Rent Act 1965 s.31](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I621EBDC08FC411E28BC0FE19ED750BBE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default)), such was understood to be the established meaning of the phrase, contained, as it had been, in a series of prior enactments and so construed in a series of judgments of the instant court. If that was what the phrase meant in s.31 of the 1965 Act, that was what it must mean in s.2 of the 1977 Act, for the words were identical and lay on the page without any later qualification. The inclusion of a tenancy for mixed purposes in s.8 of the 1977 Act, as in the [Housing Act 1996 s.81](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I39729600E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the [Commonhold and Leasehold Reform Act 2002 s.167](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0AF1A230E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default)) and s.168, was not idly surplus and its purpose was to exclude such a tenancy from s.3 of the 1977 Act because otherwise the phrase "let as a dwelling" would have included such a tenancy in it. It was the clearest window into the meaning of the phrase at least in s.3 and, by reference, in s.2. _[Wellcome Trust Ltd v Hamad [1998] Q.B. 638, [1997] 7 WLUK 636](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF7A1C5D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty v Knipe [1998] 1 W.L.R. 696, [1997] 5 WLUK 280](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0AB638F1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.

(2) Reference to T's human rights fortified that interpretation of s.2 of the 1977 Act. The cases of _[Connors v United Kingdom (66746/01) (2005) 40 E.H.R.R. 9, [2004] 5 WLUK 669](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8D3C7CE0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Kay v Lambeth LBC [2006] UKHL 10, [2006] 2 A.C. 465, [2006] 3 WLUK 244](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID1C5F580E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ assisted performance in the instant case of the obligation under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B25DFF0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7094901804c542a4adede66b43733ba5&contextData=(sc.Default)) to strive for compatible interpretation, Connors and Kay applied. From the judgment in Connors the court derived the following: that an interpretation of s.2 of the 1977 Act that prohibited a landlord from exercising otherwise than by proceedings in court an alleged right of re-entry upon premises let for use as a dwelling as well as for business purposes was an interpretation that would be compatible with the tenant's rights under the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8; and by contrast, that the opposite interpretation of it would be incompatible.
