---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:17 am
---

# Regency Villas Title Ltd v Diamond Resorts (Europe) Ltd [2018] UKSC 57

## Summary

The grant of a right to owners of timeshare units to use sporting and recreational facilities situated on the servient tenement land could amount to an easement. It satisfied the long-established requirement that the easement should accommodate the dominant tenement because the right to use adjacent recreational facilities was of benefit to the timeshare units.

## Abstract

The appellants appealed against a decision that a right granted to the respondents to use recreational facilities amounted to an easement. The respondents cross-appealed against a decision that they were not entitled to use a swimming pool built later.

The appellants owned a mansion and estate. The respondents were owners of timeshare villas built on land within the estate. That land was owned by a company associated with the appellants. A transfer in 1981 granted the timeshare owners the right to use the leisure facilities on the appellants' estate and in the mansion house. An outdoor swimming pool was later filled in and replaced by one in the mansion house. The original grantor had covenanted to maintain the facilities, but the covenant did not bind his successors and the appellants were not obliged to pay for maintenance. The grantor had envisaged that cost of maintenance would be met by members of the public paying to use the facilities. The facilities began to fall into disrepair and the respondents made voluntary payments towards upkeep under a reservation of rights. The respondents sought a declaration that they were entitled by way of easement to the free use of the appellants' recreational facilities. The Court of Appeal concluded that the rights over the facilities amounted to an easement, but the respondents had no rights in relation to the new swimming pool.

The appellants submitted that the grant could not be an easement as it did not accommodate the respondents' dominant tenement, and was not capable of forming the subject-matter of a grant.

## Held

Appeal dismissed, cross-appeal allowed.

(Lord Carnwath dissenting) **Findings of fact** **-** The 1981 transfer was part of an exercise by two associated companies to develop timeshare units on land immediately adjacent to an existing leisure complex. The parties intended to confer an easement, rather than a purely personal right. It was expressed to be conferred, not merely on the transferee, but on its successors in title, lessees and occupiers of the timeshare development. The court should give effect to that common intention. The grant was a single comprehensive right to use a complex of facilities, as existed within the leisure complex from time to time. The fact that the precise nature of the facilities might change, but the grant still applied to the complex as a whole, did not bring the grant within the rule against perpetuities, _[Dunn v Blackdown Properties [1961] Ch. 433, [1961] 3 WLUK 20](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9C3C35A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9bfa5a8f9d1540a5b3687f833d883509&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (see paras [25-32](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Did the rights accommodate the dominant tenement?** Two of the four conditions for an easement were met: there was a dominant and servient tenement, and the dominant and servient owners were different people. Whether the easement accommodated and served the dominant tenement was primarily a question of fact. In _[Ellenborough Park, Re [1956] Ch. 131, [1955] 11 WLUK 54](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0E28C30E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9bfa5a8f9d1540a5b3687f833d883509&contextData=(sc.Default))_ the court concluded that it was not fatal to the recognition of a right as an easement that it was granted for recreational use, to be enjoyed for its own sake on the servient tenement. In the instant case, the dominant tenement was to be used for the development of timeshare apartments, typically occupied for holidays by persons seeking recreation. The grant of rights to use an immediately adjacent leisure development was of service, utility and benefit to the timeshare apartments, Ellenborough applied. It mattered not that the enjoyment of the rights might be a primary reason why persons were attracted to acquire timeshare units in the dominant tenement, _[Hill v Tupper 159 E.R. 51, [1863] 5 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0E35410FABC11DB9B57B88EFF41B931/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9bfa5a8f9d1540a5b3687f833d883509&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [35, 43, 48-53, 57](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Was the right capable of forming the subject-matter of a grant?** The appellants had relied on ouster, but it was wrong to test whether a grant of rights amounted to an ouster of the servient owner by reference to what the dominant owner could do by way of step-in rights if the servient owner ceased to carry out the necessary maintenance. Ouster should be determined by the expectations of the parties at the time of the grant as to who would maintain the servient tenement. Further, step-in rights were rights to reasonable access for maintenance, so no question of ouster arose (paras [59-60, 64-65](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). An easement could not require anything more than mere passivity on the part of the servient owner. There was nothing inherently incompatible with an easement where the parties shared an expectation that the servient owner would maintain the servient tenement and any structures, or even chattels, located thereon. The only essential requirement was that the servient owner had undertaken no legal obligation of that kind to the dominant owner. The grant in the instant case had not imposed such obligations on the servient owners. It extended only to such recreational facilities as existed within the estate from time to time. It did not oblige the servient owner to maintain any particular facilities. The personal covenant did not form part of the grant (paras [66-73](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Should the law be extended to recognise this new species of easement?** Common law should accommodate itself to new types of property ownership and new ways of enjoying the use of land. Timeshare development was just such a new type, and recreational easements had become widely recognised in common law. However, there was no statutory basis for modification or discharge of easements, so when annexed to a freehold the rights could burden the servient land long after the leisure complex had outlived its natural life. The use of easements for conferring recreational rights for timeshare owners on an adjacent leisure complex was hardly ideal. Nevertheless, the grant of purely recreational and sporting rights over land which genuinely accommodated adjacent land could be the subject-matter of an easement, provided that they satisfied the well-settled conditions for an easement. Where the actual or intended use of the dominant tenement was itself recreational, the accommodation condition would generally be satisfied (paras [75-81](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Cross-appeal -** The easement extended to the new indoor swimming pool, and the respondents were entitled to compensation for the payments made under protest (paras [85, 89-93](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

### Accommodating Dominant Tenement

Lord Briggs explored whether rights of recreation and sport could be said to accommodate the dominant tenement as required under Re Ellenborough Park. Held that it was 'plain beyond a doubt' that the rights to use recreational facilities were 'of service, utility and benefit' to the timeshare land, as the communal pleasure garden had been in Re Ellenborough.

An argument based on _Hill v Tupper_ that the rights were so extensive that they could not be said to be 'ancillary' to the timeshare properties and therefore could not be easements was also rejected. Argued that this was a midreading of Hill and that provided the rights were of utility and benefit to the dominant land, easements could arise even if the recreational rights were more than ancillary. Nor did the 'ouster principle' operate on these facts. Nothing in the 1981transfer impinged on the Park owners' rights of management and control of their land. It contained no positive duty on the Park owners to maintain the facilities, so easements required nothing more than 'mere passivity' on the part of the servient owner.

Lord Carnwath, dissenting, said that the rights could not be achieved without the active participation of the Park owners as to maintenance and management. What was claimed was not a simple property right but a wholly new form of property right akin to a permanent membership of a country club.
