---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:16 am
---

# Ropaigelach v Barclays Bank plc [2000] QB 263

BB, the mortgagee of residential property mortgaged by R, made a valid demand for payment which R did not honour. BB wrote to R telling him that the property was to be put up for sale at auction and then sold the property. R, who was not residing in the property at the time, claimed he had never received the letter and, having discovered from a neighbour that the house had been sold, made an ex parte application for an injunction restraining BB from selling the house, which was refused on the basis that the sale had already been completed. R now appealed against a decision to uphold the dismissal of his originating summons to determine whether BB had been entitled to act without a court order in taking possession of his house and selling it. R submitted that the [Administration of Justice Act 1970 s.36](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF860C280E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cd37ad09a9049c39bb4adb8287bcb33&contextData=(sc.Default)) had clearly been enacted to protect a borrower from ejectment should the lender apply for a possession order and relied on _[Remon v City of London Real Property Co Ltd [1921] 1 K.B. 49, [1920] 7 WLUK 233](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I85A26C50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cd37ad09a9049c39bb4adb8287bcb33&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Cruise v Terrell [1922] 1 K.B. 664, [1922] 2 WLUK 62](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I92B11FF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cd37ad09a9049c39bb4adb8287bcb33&contextData=(sc.Default))_ to contend that s.36 should be construed as extending to circumstances where a court order had not been obtained and the lender had resorted to a self help remedy.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that it was not possible to be sure that Parliament, in enacting s.36, must have intended that a lender could only exercise its common law right to possession of a house where it had obtained a court order. It was common ground that s.36 had been enacted to restore the situation that had appertained prior to the decision in _[Birmingham Citizens Permanent Building Society v Caunt [1962] Ch. 883, [1961] 12 WLUK 36](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I75266941E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cd37ad09a9049c39bb4adb8287bcb33&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , in which it had been held that the court had no power to refuse or suspend an order for possession which the lender was otherwise entitled to. That circumstance, together with the statutory context and the language employed, indicated that s.36 had not been intended to deal with the protection of a borrower against a lender who exercised his common law right to take possession by peaceable entry without seeking a possession order. It was also relevant that a borrower in occupation was protected by the [Criminal Law Act 1977 s.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA00F8C51E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cd37ad09a9049c39bb4adb8287bcb33&contextData=(sc.Default)) .
