---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:16 am
---

# Scott v Southern Pacific Mortgages Limited [2014] UKSC 52

See [Lady Hale's judgment](http://ukscblog.com/new-judgment-scott-v-southern-pacific-mortgages-limited-2014-uksc-52/)

## Summary

A purchaser of land could not create a proprietary interest in that land, capable of being an overriding interest, until after completion of the contract for sale.

## Abstract

The appellant (S) appealed against a decision (_[[2012] EWCA Civ 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF647D5A046EA11E19F58ABC5B9D83160/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the right of the respondent mortgagee (M) to its security had priority over her right to remain in occupation.

Under a "sale and rent back" scheme, S had sold her house to a purchaser (N) on the strength of N's promise that she could remain in the house indefinitely as a tenant. N bought the house with the assistance of a mortgage from M and purported to grant a leaseback to S. Exchange, completion and the execution of the mortgage took place on the same day. N did not tell M about its promise to S. After completion, N granted S a two-year assured shorthold tenancy. That was in breach of the mortgage terms, which permitted only the grant of an assured shorthold tenancy for a fixed term of not more than 12 months. When N defaulted on the loan, M sought possession. S argued that N's promise had given her, from the exchange of contracts, an equitable proprietary right which took effect as an overriding interest under the [Land Registration Act 2002 Sch.3 para.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I383A6420E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default)) and was binding on M by virtue of [s.29(2)(a)(ii)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I70F55B30E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default)). She argued that N was a constructive trustee or was bound by a proprietary estoppel. Both the High Court and the Court of Appeal found in favour of M.

The central issue for the instant court was whether S had an overriding interest. That involved determining whether  
(i) a prospective purchaser could grant proprietary, as opposed to merely personal, rights before completion;  
(ii) even if S had proprietary rights, _[Abbey National Building Society v Cann [1991] 1 A.C. 56, [1990] 3 WLUK 426](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I476EC470E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied to prevent her from asserting an equitable right that had arisen only on completion.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) S relied on s.116 of the Act to establish that she had proprietary rights. Unregistered interests which overrode registered dispositions had to be proprietary in nature, and the combined effect of s.116 and [s.132](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I712EBAB0E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default)) was that s.116 rights had to have a proprietary element in order to have any effect. S also relied on the line of authority to the effect that following the exchange of contracts, a seller held the property on trust for the purchaser. On the face of it, N's promise bore the hallmarks of a proprietary estoppel, but the question was whether such an estoppel could be an interest in land before the promisor became the owner. Between exchange and completion the purchaser had a proprietary interest "of a sort", _[Oughtred v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1960] A.C. 206, [1959] 11 WLUK 11](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I14D3A390E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Berkley v Poulett [1977] 1 E.G.L.R. 86, [1976] 1 WLUK 13](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3804B350E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The question was whether the conveyance and the mortgage were one indivisible transaction, or whether there was a moment between the completion of the purchase and the grant of the mortgage in which the purchaser acquired legal estate before disposing of it by way of mortgage, _[Coventry Permanent Economic Building Society v Jones [1951] 1 All E.R. 901, [1951] 3 WLUK 49](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I57BEF430E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Church of England Building Society v Piskor [1954] Ch. 553, [1954] 3 WLUK 123](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8730F100E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Universal Permanent Building Society v Cooke [1952] Ch. 95, [1951] 10 WLUK 73](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE05C48A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Woolwich Equitable Building Society v Marshall [1952] Ch. 1, [1951] 10 WLUK 12](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I09B28F20E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Cann decided that the conveyance and the mortgage were indivisible but, in any event, each of the above cases assumed that even if the tenant had equitable rights as against the purchaser, those rights would only become proprietary and capable of taking priority over a mortgage when they were "fed" by the purchaser's acquisition of the legal estate, Cann applied. S's appeal had therefore to be dismissed on the ground that she acquired merely personal rights against N when she agreed to sell on the basis of its promise. Her rights only became proprietary and capable of taking priority over the mortgage when N acquired the legal estate on completion, at which point the acquisition of the legal estate and the grant of the charge were one indivisible transaction (see paras 24, 36, 56-80, 105-114 of judgment).

(2) (Obiter) (Per Lords Collins and Sumption JJ.S.C.) Given the conclusion on the first issue, the second, whether the contract for sale was part of an indivisible transaction together with the conveyance and the mortgage, did not arise and was unlikely ever to arise. Nevertheless, the court would express its views on it. It was implicit in Cann that the contract, transfer and mortgage were one indivisible transaction, _[Nationwide Anglia Building Society v Ahmed and Balakrishnan (1995) 70 P. & C.R. 381, [1995] 5 WLUK 30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0AD580C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=46bcbef9d60f4db5b92f6e6da359311f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. In the instant case the contract and conveyance had been executed on the same day, but the analysis was not dependant on that. It would be unrealistic to treat the contract of sale as a divisible element. Even if S had equitable rights of a proprietary nature arising on exchange, the mortgage would still have taken priority (paras 84-85, 90). (Per Lady Hale J.S.C and Lords Wilson and Reed JJ.S.C.) The mortgagee was not a party to the contract between the vendor and purchaser. It was difficult to see how the House of Lords rejection of Piskor in Cann implied that the contract of sale was part of the indivisible transaction along with the conveyance and mortgage (paras 115-123).
