---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:32 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:16 am
---

# Silven Properties Ltd v Royal Bank of Scotland plc [2004] 4 All ER 484

Facts: The lender repossessed and sold several properties. The value of some could have been enhanced had the lender applied for planning permission to develop them. The borrower argued that the lender was in breach of duty by not delaying the sales pending planning applications. The court held the lender was not in breach of duty.

---

## Summary

Exercise of power of sale over mortgaged property - Mortgagee or receiver appointed by mortgagee not under duty to pursue applications for planning permission or complete grant of leases - Entitled to sell property in condition in which it stood without investing money or time in increasing its likely sale value.

## Abstract

S, a property company, appealed against the dismissal of its claims against V, receivers appointed by R, the defendant mortgagee. S believed that V had, in breach of duty, sold its properties at an undervalue because they had failed to pursue planning applications for the development of the properties before selling and failed to find tenants for vacant properties. The issue before the court was whether the express appointment in the mortgage of receivers as agents of the mortgagor led to the assumption by those receivers of duties that differed from those owed by mortgagees.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that the duties in respect of the exercise of the power of sale by mortgagees and receivers were not the same. The relationship between mortgagee and receiver did not conform to ordinary agency principles and whereas a mortgagee had freedom to act entirely in accordance with its own interests, a receiver owed an equitable duty, both to the mortgagee and to all other parties interested in the equity of redemption. Neither a mortgagee nor a receiver was required to incur expense in the improvement of a security in order to sell it at a higher price, and there was freedom to investigate how such potential could be realised without any corresponding obligation to pursue those enquiries. A receiver, however, carried wider management duties than a mortgagee and had no right to remain passive if such conduct would be damaging to either the mortgagee or the mortgagor. A receiver was under no liability to a mortgagor other than to take reasonable steps to obtain a proper price for the property at the relevant time and not to act in bad faith. The fact that the receivers were agents of the mortgagor did not affect their fiduciary duty to other parties, nor the primacy of their obligation to the mortgagee to secure repayment of the debt, _[Henderson v Merrett Syndicates Ltd (No.1) [1995] 2 A.C. 145, [1994] 7 WLUK 299](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBC69D1C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Medforth v Blake [2000] Ch. 86, [1999] 5 WLUK 421](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF88DA1E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[Gomba Holdings (UK) Ltd v Homan [1986] 1 W.L.R. 1301, [1986] 3 WLUK 263](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB25A70E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Meftah v Lloyds TSB Bank Plc (No.2) [2001] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 741, [2001] 3 WLUK 618](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF8AB3C00E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Garland v Ralph Pay & Ransom (1984) 271 E.G. 106, [1984] 1 WLUK 198](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I619E1D50E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Routestone Ltd v Minories Finance Ltd [1997] B.C.C. 180, [1996] 5 WLUK 237](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I986ABD70E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved, _[Standard Chartered Bank Ltd v Walker [1982] 1 W.L.R. 1410, [1982] 6 WLUK 115](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBE18C4D1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bd8dce637cc54fffbfa47a1b917e1c7e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ referred to.
