---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:33 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:15 am
---

# Thamesmead Town Ltd v Allotey (1998) 3 EGLR 97

LCC constructed a large estate called Thamesmead. In July 1987 all land at Thamesmead became vested in TT. Under the right to buy legislation Mr and Mrs B, secure tenants on the estate, exercised the right to buy their flat from TT and the property was transferred to them in November 1988. That transfer contained certain additional rights, including, inter alia, the right to use the roads and paths owned by TT. By cl.3 of the transfer B covenanted for themselves and their successors in title that they or their successors in title would observe and perform the restrictions and conditions set out, including three positive covenants. One of the positive covenants imposed an obligation to contribute and pay on demand a fair proportion of all costs in relation to, inter alia, cleansing all roads and footpaths and the maintenance of the landscaped and communal areas. Clause 6 of the 1988 transfer provided that in the event of the disposal of the property by B they would include in the transfer a provision that their successor in title would enter into a deed of covenant in similar terms to cl.3. The transfer did not purport to give any rights to a transferee over the landscaped and communal areas on the estate, nor did it require TT to maintain such areas. In April 1992 B transferred their flat to A but in breach of cl.6 did not include the provision required by that clause. After A took possession of the property TT demanded that he pay them about GBP 200 in respect of certain works performed by them, in accordance with cl.3. A refused to pay and in September 1993 TT issued proceedings against him claiming GBP 95.91 in respect of the period May 1992 to March 1993. At first instance the judge, applying the principle stated in _[Rhone v Stephens [1994] 2 A.C. 310, [1994] 3 WLUK 266](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I86132F80E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76c1ac65a1db40dbbb4461e6debfff20&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that a successor in title to a covenantor may not be entitled to take the benefit of a transaction without undertaking the burden imposed by the transaction, allowed TT's claim to the extent of GBP 41.65, on the basis that some rights were conditional on payment of costs and some rights had been enjoyed by A. TT appealed, arguing that the whole of the claim should be allowed.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that there were two requirements for the enforceability of a positive covenant against a successor in title to the covenantor. The first was that the condition of discharging the burden had to be relevant to the exercise of the rights that enabled the benefit to be obtained. The second was that the successors in title had to have the opportunity to choose whether to take the benefit or, having taken it, to renounce it, even if only in theory, and thereby to escape the burden and that the successors in title could be deprived of the benefit if they failed to assume the burden, _[Halsall v Brizell [1957] Ch. 169, [1956] 11 WLUK 118](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB91A0A80E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76c1ac65a1db40dbbb4461e6debfff20&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and Rhone v Stephens (Executrix) applied. It could not be sufficient that the taking of an incidental benefit should enable the enforcement of a burden against a person who had not himself covenanted to undertake the particular burden. The successor in title had to be able as of right to obtain the relevant benefit. In the instant case, A had no right under the transfer to use the communal areas and TT had no obligation to maintain them. Similarly, in order for the burden of a covenant to be enforceable, the successors in title had to have a choice whether to acquire the rights at all.
