---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:33 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:15 am
---

# Tse Kwong Lam v Wong Chit Sen [1983] 1 WLR 1349

Facts: The lender sold the property by auction. The successful bidder was the lender’s wife, acting on behalf of a company owned by the lender and his family.

---

There is no inflexible rule that a mortgagee exercising his power of sale under a mortgage cannot sell to a company in which he has an interest. The sale has to be in good faith for the best price reasonably obtainable. In 1963 P arranged for the construction of a 15-storey building containing 90 shop, office and flat units on land leased by him in Hong Kong. He financed this partly by borrowing some USD HK 1.4m. on the security of a mortgage under a legal charge containing the usual power of sale. By 1966 54 units remained unsold and there were arrears of interest under the mortgage. The mortgagee gave notice of his intention to exercise his power of sale. P failed to make payment, and the mortgagee arranged for a sale at public auction and placed advertisements on three separate days giving the minimum details and setting strict conditions as to payment of the price. The mortgagee also fixed a reserve price of HKD 1.2m. without consulting the auctioneers or other estate agents. At a board meeting of a company controlled by the mortgagee, the company resolved that it would bid HKD 1.2m. for the property. At the auction, the reserve price was announced, and the only bid came from the company. Subsequently the mortgagee advanced HKD 1.2m. to the company by way of an interest free loan and the company paid that sum to the mortgagee in return for an assignment of the property. The mortgagee then claimed some HKD 400,000 from P as the amount still outstanding under the mortgage. P disputed the sum and counterclaimed on the basis that the sale was improper and at an undervalue. The mortgagee's claim was referred to an arbitrator who found that P owed some HKD 239,000, but suspended execution on that sum pending determination of the counterclaim. In May 1979 judgment was given for P on the counterclaim since the price paid was not a proper one, but the court refused to set aside the sale because of the lapse of time and instead awarded P damages. The mortgagee and P cross-appealed. The Hong Kong Court of Appeal set aside the judgment.

Held, that there was no inflexible rule that a mortgagee exercising his power of sale under a mortgage could not sell to a company in which he had an interest. However, the mortgagee and company had to show that the sale was in good faith and the mortgagee had taken reasonable precautions to obtain the best price reasonably obtainable at the time, namely by taking expert advice as to the method of sale, the steps which ought reasonably to be taken to make the sale a success and the amount of reserve. The mortgagee was not bound to postpone the sale in the hope of obtaining a better price or to adopt a piecemeal method of sale which could only be carried out over a substantial period or at some risk of loss, but sale by auction did not necessarily prove the validity of a transaction since the price obtainable at an auction which only produced one bid might be less than the true market price (_York Buildings Co v Mackenzie (1795) 3 Pat. 378, [1795] 1 WLUK 1_, _[Warner v Jacob (1882) 20 Ch. D. 220, [1882] 3 WLUK 27](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF05C0C40E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=449bd3ecbb36420783be25fffb3783dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Farrar v Farrars Ltd (1888) 40 Ch. D. 395, [1888] 12 WLUK 67](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA5AAE9B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=449bd3ecbb36420783be25fffb3783dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Kennedy v De Trafford [1897] A.C. 180, [1897] 4 WLUK 43](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID26DCE40E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=449bd3ecbb36420783be25fffb3783dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Hodson v Deans [1903] 2 Ch. 647, [1903] 7 WLUK 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC183F8C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=449bd3ecbb36420783be25fffb3783dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Cuckmere Brick Co v Mutual Finance [1971] Ch. 949, [1971] 2 WLUK 130](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I92C08940E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=449bd3ecbb36420783be25fffb3783dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied). Applying those principles, the company was not barred by law from purchasing the property, but in view of the close relationship between the company and the mortgagee, and in particular the conflict of duty and interest to which the mortgagee was subject, the sale to the company could not be supported unless the mortgagee proved that he had taken all reasonable steps to obtain the best price reasonably obtainable. On the evidence, the mortgagee had failed to establish that. However, because P had been guilty of inexcusable delay in prosecuting his counterclaim, he was not entitled to have the sale set aside but was entitled only to the alternative remedy of damages. Accordingly P's appeal was allowed to that extent.
