---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:33 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:15 am
---

# Wood v Waddington [2015] EWCA Civ 538

## Summary

Landowners were entitled to claim two rights of way under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.62](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38E0B640E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default)) over neighbouring land as the easements which would allow access to tracks were continuous and apparent, and there had been sufficient evidence of use.

## Abstract

The appellants appealed against a decision that they did not enjoy rights of way over neighbouring land owned by the respondent.

In 1998, a parcel of land had been sold in parts; the appellants' predecessors in title acquired one part, and the respondent acquired the other part. The land was crossed by various farm tracks and two public bridleways. At issue was the appellants' entitlement, as successors in title, to access a track and gain access to a public road (easement one), and whether they were entitled to cross another stretch of track on foot or horseback (easement two). At the time of transfer, the appellants' land included stables, but they had since begun a livery business. Their claim for rights of way based on an express grant under the transfer of title, and a claim under the [Law of Property Act 1925 s.62](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38E0B640E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default)), had been dismissed. The issues were whether the appellants enjoyed rights of way (i) which were the subject of an express grant as a right of a "continuous nature" under cl.12 of the transfer; (ii) under s.62 as an advantage enjoyed with the land at the time of conveyance, and if so, the scope of such rights.

The respondent submitted that any rights under easement two to use the rights of way on horseback were limited to use for domestic purposes, as the appellants' livery business did not exist at the time of conveyance to their predecessors in title.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The usual meaning of continuous under cl.12 was uninterrupted or unbroken: the right or advantage claimed was a right to use the ways, not the ways themselves. It was clear that it was the use that had to be continuous. The reasonable reader would interpret cl.12 in that conventional sense and as confined to easements of that category. The claimed rights of way were not among them. The claim based on the express terms of cl.12 failed (see paras [21, 23](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) Section 62 could only operate to grant easements where there had not been diversity of occupation on the basis that the exercise of the relevant rights had been continuous and apparent, _[Alford v Hannaford [2011] EWCA Civ 1099, [2012] 1 P. & C.R. DG2, [2011] 10 WLUK 144](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I24306CC0F13C11E0935BCD649DA4DE02/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. However, if a quasi-easement fell within the category of easements that were "enjoyed with" the land conveyed then there was no additional requirement that an easement had to be necessary for the reasonable enjoyment of the land under s.62, _[Watts v Kelson (1870-71) L.R. 6 Ch. App. 166, [1871] 1 WLUK 31](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF10348C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The applicability of s.62 depended on the features observable at the date of the conveyance and the use made of the claimed rights: in relation to the first easement there were sufficient signs on the ground for the claimed route to have been continuous and apparent, _[Wheeldon v Burrows (1879) 12 Ch. D. 31, [1879] 6 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF8BFB8F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The judge had found that the claimed route had been used once a month in the period immediately preceding the transfers; once a month did not fall short of a regular pattern of use, _[Diment v NH Foot Ltd [1974] 1 W.L.R. 1427, [1974] 2 WLUK 21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I991FDA70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. That was sufficient to count as "enjoyment" for the purposes of s.62. In relation to the second claimed right of way, it too was continuous and apparent, and there was sufficient evidence of vehicular use to demonstrate that it was enjoyed along with the remainder of the track that had been conveyed to the appellants' predecessors in title. As to the scope of those rights, and a mismatch between proved and claimed uses, the more onerous included the less onerous, but that did not extend to a right to drive animals, _[White v Richards [1993] R.T.R. 318, [1993] 3 WLUK 204](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF8FF8110E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. In the instant case where the right was described in terms of the use proved, namely with vehicles, that also entitled the grantee to use the way on foot or on horseback, but not to drive animals. However, any rights of way on horseback were not restricted to use for domestic purposes: since there were already stables on the land, the mere fact that the appellants started a livery business did not amount to a radical change in the dominant tenement, on which the servient owner's right to object depended, _[McAdams Homes Ltd v Robinson [2004] EWCA Civ 214, [2005] 1 P. & C.R. 30, [2004] 2 WLUK 751](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF05F3600E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=48ef45762ae44585ad0e80fea2cd1619&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [26, 35-37, 48, 53-55, 57, 66, 75-76, 78-79, 81](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
