---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:33 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:15 am
---

# Wright v Macadam [1949] 2 kb 744

**Facts:** Mrs Wright was the tenant of part of a house owned by Mr Macadam. During her tenancy, Mr Macadam gave Mrs Wright informal permission to store coal in part of his shed which was on his retained land. This arrangement was perfectly amicable. When Mrs Wright’s lease came to an end, Mr Macadam granted a new one by deed. The new lease did not mention the use of the shed for storage. When Mr Macadam then tried to charge Mrs Wright for the use of the shed, she claimed she had an easement to use the shed, which she could exercise without payment.

**Held:** The court found in her favour and said that the LPA 1925, s 62 operated to imply the informal right to use the shed into the new lease as a full legal easement.

It is not clear why an informal permission should not simply be implied into the new document as an informal permission, but the judge in the case was quite clear on this point. Jenkins LJ said that

> ‘a ‘right’ permissive at the date of the grant may become a legal right upon the grant by the force of the general words [in the LPA 1925, s 62]'.

---

The following observations apply to s.62(1) of the Law of Property Act, 1925, which provides that

> "a conveyance of land shall be deemed to include and shall by virtue of this Act operate to convey, with the land, all … liberties, privileges, easements, rights, and advantages whatsoever appertaining or reputed to appertain to the land, or any part thereof, or, at the time of conveyance demised, occupied, or enjoyed with, or reputed or known as part or parcel of or appurtenant to the land or any part thereof"
1. The section is not confined to rights which, as a matter of law, were so annexed or appurtenant to the property conveyed at the time of the conveyance as to make them actual legally enforceable rights. Thus, on severance of a piece of land in common ownership, the quasi easements de facto enjoyed in respect of it by one part of the land over another will pass although, of course, as a matter of law, no man can have a right appendant or appurtenant to one part of his property exercisable by him over the other part of his property.
2. The right, in order to pass, need not be one to which the owner or occupier for the time being of the land has had what may be described as a permanent title. A right enjoyed merely by permission is enough.
3. For the purposes of s.62 it is only necessary that the right should be one capable of being granted at law, or, in other words, a right known to the law. If it is a right of that description, it matters not that it has been, in fact, enjoyed by permission only.
4. The provisions of s.62 cannot apply where in the circumstances of the case there can have been no expectation by the parties that the enjoyment of the right could be other than temporary. In 1941, Mrs. W. was a statutory tenant of two rooms on the top floor of the defendant's house, and, by permission separately granted, was using a shed in the garden for the storage of her coal. In 1943, the defendant granted to Mrs. W. and her daughter, the plaintiffs in the action, a new tenancy of the upper flat, including an additional room. The tenancy agreement contained no reference to the coal shed, nor any indication of intention one way or the other whether the plaintiffs were to continue to enjoy the use of the coal shed. A dispute arose between the parties about the plaintiffs' right to use the coal shed. Held, the fact that Mrs. W. used the coal shed by permission of the defendant could not prevent s.62 from applying. The right to use the coal shed for the purpose of storing such coal as might be required for domestic purposes was a right or easement which the law would recognise. It could not be said that it was in the contemplation of the parties that the enjoyment of the right should be purely temporary. Consequently, the right to use the coal shed was, at the date of the letting in 1943, a right enjoyed with the top floor flat within the meaning of s.62 of the Law of Property Act, 1925, with the result that (as no contrary intention was expressed in the document) the right in question had to be regarded as having passed by virtue of that letting. ( _[International Tea Stores Co v Hobbs [1903] 2 Ch. 165, [1903] 4 WLUK 38](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICA736AB0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=681e1685a1b7476c8e0947b098b69708&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Lewis v Meredith [1913] 1 Ch. 571, [1913] 3 WLUK 49](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE08AEF30E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=681e1685a1b7476c8e0947b098b69708&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[White v Williams [1922] 1 K.B. 727, [1922] 2 WLUK 126](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF910E630E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=681e1685a1b7476c8e0947b098b69708&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Burrows v Lang [1901] 2 Ch. 502, [1901] 5 WLUK 59](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7FA5A2F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=681e1685a1b7476c8e0947b098b69708&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; and _[Birmingham Dudley & District Banking Co v Ross (1888) 38 Ch. D. 295, [1888] 3 WLUK 91](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I752C35A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=681e1685a1b7476c8e0947b098b69708&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).
