---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:24 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:39 am
---

# Bellman v Northampton Recruitment Ltd [2018] EWCA Civ 2214

## Summary

A company was vicariously liable for an assault committed by its managing director on an employee after a Christmas party. Although the assault occurred at a separate drinking session after the party, the wrongdoer was not present merely as a fellow reveller but as managing director. There was sufficient connection between the position in which he was employed and his wrongful conduct so as to make the employer liable under the principle of social justice.

## Abstract

An employee appealed against a decision that a company was not vicariously liable for the actions of its managing director, who had assaulted him after the work Christmas party.

The employee worked as a sales manager. The managing director was regarded as the company's directing mind, and had a very wide remit. He organised and paid for a Christmas party for staff and their partners. After the party he arranged for taxis to take some of the attendees to a nearby hotel, where they were staying at the company's expense. They all continued drinking and a work-related discussion turned to a new employee, who was said to be receiving higher pay than others. The director pointedly walked away from the discussion, before returning and summoning the remaining employees. He began to lecture them, and when challenged by the employee he punched him twice. The second punch knocked the employee to the floor where he hit his head and sustained a serious brain injury. The issue was whether the company was vicariously liable for the director's actions. The High Court found that it was not, because the hotel drinking session was entirely independent of the Christmas party and unconnected to the company's business.

The employee submitted that there was a sufficient connection between the managing director's position and his wrongful conduct to render the company liable under the principle of social justice. The company argued that the director was a mere reveller at the hotel, and was not acting within the course of his employment or his actual authority.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

**Correct test** - The previous case law should be viewed through the prism of the decision in _[Mohamud v Wm Morrison Supermarkets Plc [2016] UKSC 11, [2016] A.C. 677, [2016] 3 WLUK 90](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AC5EB20E06C11E58FAB889BCE4AFF26/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2695ddeebe7d4a2294a4d13ab5318f1e&contextData=(sc.Default))_. The question of whether there was a sufficient connection between the position in which the wrongdoer was employed and his wrongful conduct so as to make the employer liable under the principle of social justice required the court to conduct an evaluative judgement. It was a question of law based on the primary facts as found. The first question was what functions or field of activities were entrusted to the managing director by the company. That question was to be addressed broadly. Context and circumstances were important, and the mere opportunity of being present at a particular time or place did not mean that the act was within the relevant field of activities, _[Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215, [2001] 5 WLUK 105](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE1A0CC01E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2695ddeebe7d4a2294a4d13ab5318f1e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. However, actual authority was not the right yardstick to apply. Mohamud made it clear that the question of "what is the nature of the job" was not a question of what the employee was expressly authorised to do. That touchstone had already been rejected in _[Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366, [2002] 12 WLUK 137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9B82A9A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2695ddeebe7d4a2294a4d13ab5318f1e&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Dubai followed. Nor was it necessarily appropriate to rely on ostensible authority post-Mohamud. The court was required to look at the question of the field of activities "broadly", Mohamud followed. Adherence to an additional or secondary test would necessarily limit the first (see paras [16-17, 22-23](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Managing Director's field of activities -** It was clear from the judge's findings that the managing director's functions were widely drawn. He was the directing mind and will of a relatively small "round-the-clock" company, with responsibility for all management decisions. He would have seen the maintenance of his managerial authority as a central part of that role. He did not have set hours, had authority to control his own methods of work and for much of the week was working on company business or available for consultation. His remit and his authority were very wide (paras [18, 24](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Sufficiency of connection between the field of activities and the wrongful act** - The judge was wrong to find that there was insufficient connection between the director's field of activities and the assault. While the unscheduled drinking session was not a seamless extension of the Christmas party, it had to be seen against the background of the evening's events. It was not just an impromptu drinks party between work colleagues which might happen on any night after work. The drinks occurred on the same evening as the work event paid for and orchestrated by the managing director. He had already been fulfilling his managerial duties for a large part of the evening. Although the drinking session was not a seamless event and attendance was voluntary, the managing director was not merely a fellow reveller. He was present as managing director and his field of activity was almost unrestricted, and exercised at almost any time. His managerial decision-making having been challenged, he took it upon himself to exercise authority over his subordinate employees by summoning them and expounding the extent and scope of his authority with the intention of quelling dissent. The attack arose out of a misuse of the position entrusted to him as managing director. There was no suggestion that his behaviour arose as a result of something personal. The company should be vicariously liable for his actions (paras [25-28, 34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(per Lord Justice Irwin)** The combination of circumstances in the instant case would arise very rarely. Liability would not arise merely because of an argument about work matters between colleagues where one was more senior than the other. The instant case was not authority for the proposition that employers became insurers for violent or other tortious acts by their employees (paras [38-40](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
