---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:24 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:37 am
---

# Darnley v Croydon Health Services NHS Trust [2018] UKSC 50

Mr Darnley went to A&E with a head injury following an assault. After being booked in by a receptionist he was told that he would have to wait up to five hours to be seen. Receptionists giving evidence confirmed that this information was not correct: patients with head injuries could expect to be seen by a triage nurse within half an hour.

Mr Darnley went home about twenty minutes later as he felt too unwell to stay. His condition got worse and he was rushed back to hospital in an ambulance about an hour later for the evacuation of a haematoma. He was left with severe and disabling brain damage.

It was accepted that if given correct information about waiting times Mr Darnley would have stayed at A&E, would have been there when his condition worsened and would have made a near full recovery.

Reversing the decision of the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court ruled that the reception staff owed Mr Darnley a duty of care at least to not give him misleading information about waiting times. Where that misinformation resulted in reasonably foreseeable harm, as had happened here, the hospital would be responsible.

The Court of Appeal had placed a lot of weight on the receptionists being non-clinical staff, but the Supreme Court disagreed. As the hospital had decided to give information about waiting times through non-clinical staff it was up to them to ensure that it was done correctly:

> '…a receptionist in an A&E department cannot, of course, be expected to give medical advice or information but he or she can be expected to take reasonable care not to provide misleading advice as to the availability of medical assistance. The standard required is that of an averagely competent and well-informed person performing the function of a receptionist at a department providing emergency medical care.'

---

## Summary

NHS Trusts had a duty to take reasonable care not to cause physical injury to those who presented themselves at accident and emergency departments complaining of illness or injury. The scope of that duty extended to taking reasonable care not to provide misleading information, whether given by medical or non-medical staff, about how long patients might have to wait before seeing a clinician. Where the standard practice was for patients to be triaged within a certain time of arrival, it was not unreasonable to require that they be given that information, either orally by the receptionist, in a leaflet, or by a prominent notice.

## Abstract

The appellant appealed against a decision that an NHS Trust's duty of care did not extend to providing patients with accurate information about waiting times in the accident and emergency (A&E) department.

The appellant had gone to the trust's A&E department after sustaining a head injury. He was told by the receptionist that it would be four to five hours before he would be seen. However, that was inaccurate; she should have told him that he would be examined by a triage nurse within 30 minutes, and that the triage nurse would decide how soon he needed to see a doctor. Had the appellant been told that, he would have waited for the triage nurse. As it was, he went home after 19 minutes, without telling anyone and without being seen by a clinician. At home he collapsed and was returned to hospital by ambulance. Although he underwent neurosurgery, he suffered permanent brain damage in the form of a left hemiplegia. He claimed damages from the trust, alleging that it had breached its duty of care to him when he first presented at A&E by failing to assess him for emergency triage and by failing to give him accurate information about how long he would have to wait before being seen by a clinician. The trial judge found in favour of the hospital and the Court of Appeal dismissed the appellant's appeal, holding by a majority that neither the receptionist nor the trust acting by the receptionist had any duty to advise about waiting times. Alternatively, it found that the appellant had broken the chain of causation by leaving A&E when he did.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

**Duty of care** - The case fell within an established category of duty of care for NHS Trusts. Those running A&E departments owed a duty to take reasonable care not to cause physical injury to those who presented themselves complaining of illness or injury, and that duty existed before the patient was treated, _[Barnett v Chelsea and Kensington Hospital Management Committee [1969] 1 Q.B. 428, [1967] 11 WLUK 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6FA012F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b5615e2165cb4eb8b68fc5f3d3fed041&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ applied. Once the appellant had presented at A&E seeking medical attention, had provided the information required by the receptionist and had been "booked in", he entered into a patient/health care provider relationship with the trust and was in a distinct and recognisable situation in which the law imposed a duty of care. The scope of that duty clearly extended to a duty to take reasonable care not to provide misleading information which might foreseeably cause physical injury (see paras [14- 16](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). In determining whether there was a duty of care in a case such as the instant one, it was not appropriate to distinguish between medically qualified professionals and administrative staff. The trust had charged its non-medically qualified staff with being the first point of contact for those seeking medical assistance and, consequently, those members of staff were responsible for providing accurate information about the availability of medical assistance. The trust's duty of care had to be considered in the round. It had a duty to take care not to provide misinformation and could not avoid that duty simply because the misinformation was given by receptionists rather than clinicians, _[Kent v Griffiths (No.3) [2001] Q.B. 36, [2000] 2 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID36FADE0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b5615e2165cb4eb8b68fc5f3d3fed041&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ applied (paras [17-20](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Negligent breach of duty** - While it was impossible for A&E receptionists to give each patient accurate information as to precisely when they would be seen by a clinician, it was not unreasonable to require them to take reasonable care not to provide misleading information as to the likely availability of medical assistance. The standard required was that of an averagely competent and well-informed person performing the function of a receptionist at a department providing emergency medical care. In the instant case, the receptionists knew that the standard procedure was to triage head injury patients. Their usual practice was to tell such patients that they would be seen by a triage nurse as soon as possible, or within 30 minutes. It was not clear why the appellant had not been told that, and it was not unreasonable to require that patients in his position should be given that information, either orally, in a leaflet, or by a prominent notice. The appellant was given incomplete information and was misled as to the availability of medical assistance. Given the trial judge's finding that it was reasonably foreseeable that a person who believed they were facing a four or five hour wait to see a doctor might decide to leave, the provision of such misleading information by a receptionist was negligent (paras [24-27](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Causation** - The appellant had not broken the chain of causation. Three findings made by the trial judge were critical in that regard. First was the finding above. Second was the finding that had the appellant been told that he would be triaged within 30 minutes, he would not have left, his collapse would have occurred within the hospital, he would have undergone surgery sooner than he did, and he would have made an almost complete recovery. Third was the finding that the appellant's decision to leave had been based at least in part on the information given to him by the receptionist (paras [28-31](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
