---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:24 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:37 am
---

# Gee v DePuy International Ltd [2018] EWHC 1208 (QB)

## Summary

A "metal-on-metal" hip prosthesis for use in total hip arthroplasties was not defective within the meaning of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 s.3. In so deciding, the court considered the test for assessing whether there was a defect, preferring the approach in Wilkes v DePuy International Ltd [2016] EWHC 3096 (QB), [2018] Q.B. 627, [2016] 12 WLUK 134 to that in A v National Blood Authority (No.1) [2001] 3 All E.R. 289, [2001] 3 WLUK 710.

## Abstract

In group litigation brought under the no-fault liability regime in the Consumer Protection Act 1987 against the manufacturer of a prosthesis for use in total hip arthroplasties, the court was required to determine liability.

Prostheses for use in total hip arthroplasty consisted of a metal femoral stem, a ball-shaped femoral head, and an acetabular cup. The articulation between the femoral head and the lining of the acetabular cup was known as the "bearing", and the surgeon could choose between a metal or ceramic femoral head, and a metal, ceramic or polyethylene cup lining. Once implanted, all bearings, irrespective of the materials used, would produce particulate debris as a result of wear. The amount of debris produced would vary from patient to patient, as would the body's reaction. No hip prosthesis would last forever, and many patients would eventually need revision surgery. Up until 2002, most hip prostheses had metal-on-polyethylene (MoP) bearings, which performed well in elderly and inactive patients, but had a higher failure rate in younger, more active patients. At that time, the received wisdom was that MoP prostheses would generally last for 10-15 years, with a risk that some might fail sooner. In 2002, in an attempt to improve prosthesis survival rates, the manufacturer introduced to the market a metal-on-metal prosthesis with a large femoral head (the Pinnacle MoM). The claimants were 312 patients who had been implanted with the Pinnacle MoM and claimed to have suffered an adverse reaction to metal wear particulate debris (ARMD) necessitating revision surgery. They alleged that the Pinnacle MoM was defective within the meaning of the Act interpreted in the light of Directive 85/374. Section 2 of the Act required them to prove that there was a defect in the prosthesis which had caused damage. Pursuant to s.3, there would be a defect if the safety of the prosthesis was not such as "persons generally are entitled to expect". As a preliminary issue, the court was required to determine whether the manufacturer was liable, subject to any development risk defence.

The claimants submitted that (1) the propensity of the Pinnacle MoM to result in ARMD leading to early revision constituted a defect within the meaning of s.3; alternatively, (2) because of the propensity to cause ARMD, the Pinnacle MoM carried a materially increased risk of failure than comparator prostheses, and it therefore failed to meet the standard of safety that the public was entitled to expect.

## Held

Preliminary issue determined in favour of defendant.

Legal principles - The level of safety that the public was entitled to expect had to be evaluated as at the time the product was first introduced to the market. However, in determining whether the product met that level, the court was entitled to have regard to everything relevant known about it, whether or not that information had been available when it was first put on the market. The test was objective, and the standard of safety that the public was entitled to expect might differ from product to product. The court had to make its assessment on a case-by-case basis, by reference to all the relevant circumstances. The list of relevant circumstances set out in s.3 was not exhaustive, and the court had to take a flexible approach. The balance between the benefits and risks associated with the product could be relevant. Where a product included a feature which gave it a potential functional advantage but also introduced a risk, that risk might be one that the public would be expected to accept. Much would depend on the nature and seriousness of the risk and the likelihood of its manifestation. Also relevant was the existence of learned intermediaries such as surgeons, and the nature of the information provided to them, Wilkes applied. It would also be relevant that a product was subject to a regulatory regime, though the weight given to regulatory compliance would depend on the circumstances (see paras 73-76, 80-95, 139-178 of judgment). There was no absolute liability for the harm caused by a harmful characteristic. The natural propensity of all hip prostheses to eventually fail was not a defect, and nor was their propensity to shed particulates as a result of wear. The court had first to identify the defect, and then examine the causal relationship between the defect and the damage, Wilkes v DePuy International Ltd [2016] EWHC 3096 (QB), [2018] Q.B. 627, [2016] 12 WLUK 134 applied. Claimants should not try to prove a causal connection between defect and damage without first identifying what the defect was, A v National Blood Authority (No.1) [2001] 3 All E.R. 289, [2001] 3 WLUK 710 not followed. The fact that a product failed following normal use and in circumstances in which a standard product would not have failed might enable the court to infer that it was defective. However, there might be circumstances in which a greater degree of specificity was required, for example, if the damage could have arisen even if the product met the statutory safety standard. In such a case, the claimant might have to establish that the failure was due to something abnormal, or that something must have happened to elevate the inherent risk to a level that was higher than the public was entitled to expect (paras 96-100).

Propensity to result in ARMD - The claimants' primary case was untenable. Safety was a relative concept, and no product could be absolutely safe. When the Pinnacle MoM was launched, it was known that all hip prostheses would shed debris; that all MoM bearings would produce debris; and that ARMD could cause the prosthesis to fail. The natural propensity of MoM bearings to shed debris that might cause ARMD was impossible to eliminate, and the small minority of patients who would need revision surgery because of ARMD could not be identified in advance. ARMD was one of the normal risks inherent in the use of an MoM prosthesis. Thus, the public was not entitled to expect that an MoM prosthesis (or the Pinnacle MoM) would not produce debris as a concomitant of normal use. The inherent propensity to shed debris through normal use was not a defect, and the incidence of an ARMD in a small minority of patients could not turn it into one. The decision in Boston Scientific Medizintechnik GmbH v AOK Sachsen-Anhalt - Die Gesundheitskasse (C-503/13) EU:C:2015:148, [2015] 3 C.M.L.R. 6, [2015] 3 WLUK 138 was not authority for the proposition that a known risk inherent in normal use could constitute a defect, Boston Scientific considered. The claimants submitted that their primary case was supported by National Blood Authority. However, the approach adopted in that case was circular. The approach in Wilkes was the correct one (paras 20, paras 101-102, 108-112, 116-119, 133-135).

Materially increased risk of failure: principles - The claimants argued that because of the incidence of ARMD that could be reliably predicted, the Pinnacle MoM had a materially higher risk of early failure than did relevant comparators. The appropriate comparator was an established MoP prosthesis already on the market in 2002. When the manufacturer introduced the Pinnacle MoM, it warned of the possibility that some patients might suffer an adverse reaction necessitating revision surgery. It also indicated that the extent of the risk was unknown. Surgeons were therefore aware of the risk, and the key issue was whether the manifestation of that known risk was sufficient to bring the Pinnacle MoM below the safety threshold in s.3. The claimants relied on surgical revision rates to show that it was. However, they failed to show that the Pinnacle MoM's revision rate was very much higher than that of the comparator. The survival rate of a prosthesis was only one factor by which its performance could be judged. If, like the Pinnacle MoM, it offered greater stability, a greater range of movement and could be revised more easily than existing models, the public might be expected to accept some (but not a much greater) risk of early failure. The fact that, in the short-term, a prosthesis did not perform as well as the competitors it was designed to improve upon would not necessarily demonstrate that it failed to meet the expectation of safety. In 2002, the degree of risk of early failure that a patient implanted with a Pinnacle MoM could reasonably be expected to accept was that which was regarded, at that time, as being acceptable for the comparator prostheses. It could not be measured by reference to subsequently-discovered information about the comparator's performance. Hindsight could not be used to denote the entitled expectation of safety (paras 136-138, 243-255, 269-274, 290-295, 300-317).

Materially increased risk of failure: conclusion - On the balance of probabilities, there was no materially greater risk of the Pinnacle MoM failing within the first 10 years than a comparator prosthesis. The claimants had therefore failed to establish that the Pinnacle MoM was defective. To the extent that any of them had developed ARMD, the manufacturer was not liable. In 2002 it was known that all prostheses produced wear debris which could cause adverse reactions leading to early revision. The manufacturer expressly warned the surgical community of that risk, the extent of which, it indicated, was unknown and incalculable. At that time, the expected failure rate of an appropriate comparator was around 15% over the first 10 years. The public was entitled to expect that the Pinnacle MoM would not have a risk of failure that was much greater than 15%, and there was insufficient evidence to conclude that its revision rates were materially worse than 15% (paras 484-500).
