---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:25 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:35 am
---

# Phipps v Rochester Corporation [1955] 1 QB 450

 It was held that, where reasonable, an occupier is entitled to assume that a child will be subject to parental care. The claimant, who was five, went 'blackberrying' with his sister. They walked across a large area of land that was part of a housing estate being developed by the defendants. The claimant fell down a trench that had been dug by an employee of the defendants. The trench would have been obvious to an adult. It was held that prudent parents would not have allowed a young child to walk across the area in question and, therefore, the defendants were entitled to assume that children would not come onto the premises alone (because their parents would stop them) or if they did come onto the premises, they would be accompanied by an adult. The defendants therefore satisfied their duty of care to the very young child as they made their premises reasonably safe for a child accompanied by an adult, and in the circumstances the defendants were entitled to expect an adult would be accompanying the child.

 ---

## Abstract

Per Devlin, J.:

> "… The general principle which governs the relationship between licensors and licensees can be made to work in the case of little children without the employment of any special device. The general principle is that a licensor must give warning of any danger which would not be perceived by a licensee using reasonable care for his own safety… . His duty is to consider with reasonable care whether there are on his premises, so far as he knows their condition, any dangers that would not be obvious to the persons whom he has permitted to use them; and if there are, to give warning of them or to remove them. If he rightly determines a danger to be obvious, he will not be liable because some individual licensee, albeit without negligence in the special circumstances of his case, fails to perceive it. He must be taken to know generally the 'habits, capacities and propensities' of those whom he himself has licensed, but not their individual peculiarities. In the light of that general knowledge and on the assumption that they will behave reasonably, he must determine what steps he will take. If he makes that determination carefully, he cannot be made liable, whatever may subsequently happen."

Per Devlin, J., further:

> "A licensor who tacitly permits the public to use his land without discriminating between its members must assume that the public may include little children. But as a general rule he will have discharged his duty towards them if the dangers which they may encounter are only those which are obvious to a guardian or of which he has given a warning comprehensible by a guardian. To every general rule there are, of course, exceptions. A licensor cannot divest himself of the obligation of finding out something about the sort of people who are availing themselves of his permission and the sort of use they are making of it. He may have to take into account the social habits of the neighbourhood. No doubt there are places where little children go to play unaccompanied. If the licensor knows or ought to anticipate that, he may have to take steps accordingly. But the responsibility for the safety of little children must rest primarily upon the parents; it is their duty to see that such children are not allowed to wander about by themselves, or at least to satisfy themselves that the places to which they do allow their children to go unaccompanied are safe for them to go to. It would not be socially desirable if parents were, as a matter of course, able to shift the burden of looking after their children from their own shoulders to those of persons who happen to have accessible bits of land. Different considerations may well apply to public parks or to recognised playing grounds where parents allow their children to go unaccompanied in the reasonable belief that they are safe."

The plaintiff, aged five, went, with his sister, aged seven, across an open grass space, part of the defendants' building site, and fell into a long deep trench, and broke his leg. The defendants knew that children were in the habit of playing in the houses under construction and, if they did so during working hours, they were chased away by the workmen. However, no child was ever chased off the open space where the trench was.

Held,  
(1) children as a class were licensed to play on the open space;

(2) the trench was neither an allurement to a child nor a danger concealed from an adult or even from a big child; it was, however, a danger imperceptible by a little child of the plaintiff's age simply because he was not old enough to see the necessity of avoiding it or of taking special care;

(3) there was no evidence to show that little children frequently went unaccompanied on the open space in a way which ought to have brought home to the defendants that that was the use that was being made of their licence; the defendants could not have anticipated that it was a place in which children of five would be sent out to play by themselves; any parent who looked could have seen the trench and taken steps to prevent his child going there; the defendants were entitled to assume that parents would behave in this prudent way and were not obliged to take upon themselves parental duties; therefore, there must be judgment for the defendants. ( _[Taylor v Glasgow City Council [1922] 1 A.C. 44, [1921] 11 WLUK 120](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICDF41080E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1a21dce637784c5ca6d6105d8cbbb213&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Cooke v Midland Great Western Railway of Ireland [1909] A.C. 229, [1909] 3 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8DB4BA20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1a21dce637784c5ca6d6105d8cbbb213&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Williams v Cardiff Corp [1950] 1 K.B. 514, [1950] 1 WLUK 383](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0106B5E0E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1a21dce637784c5ca6d6105d8cbbb213&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Latham v R Johnson & Nephew Ltd [1913] 1 K.B. 398, [1912] 12 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID76CCC20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1a21dce637784c5ca6d6105d8cbbb213&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Liddle v Yorkshire (North Riding) CC [1934] 2 K.B. 101, [1934] 4 WLUK 15](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0C5D550E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1a21dce637784c5ca6d6105d8cbbb213&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and _Morley v Staffordshire CC [1939] 4 All E.R. 92, [1939] 10 WLUK 3_ considered).
