---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:25 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:34 am
---

# Qualcast v Haynes [1959] AC 743

The question whether a master has provided a safe system of working for his servant is one of fact, not law, and previous decisions on other facts are of no authority in a later case. Per Lord Somervell of Harrow: “If the reasons given by a judge for arriving at the conclusion previously reached by a jury are to be treated as 'law' and citable, the precedent system will die from a surfeit of authorities.” An experienced moulder pouring molten metal into a mould accidentally poured some on his foot and burned it. In an action against his employers for negligence in not providing a safe system of work, the judge found that the employers had, to the man's knowledge, protective spats, which would have prevented injury, available on demand and the judge expressed the view that that was all an employer was reasonably bound to do for his workman's safety. But he considered himself bound by authority to hold that the employers were also under a duty to urge the moulder to wear the spats, and found as a fact that they had not done so.

Held, the employers were not negligent; the cases cited to the judge on different facts were no more binding on him than would have been the decision of a jury on those facts if the earlier cases had been tried by jury.

---

Respondent was employed at appellants’ foundry as a moulder. He was thirty-eight years old and had been a moulder all his working life. While he was casting at the moulding boxes, the ladle of molten metal which he was holding slipped, and some of the metal splashed on to his left foot and, as he was not wearing protective spats or special boots, his foot was injured. Appellants kept in their stores spats which could be had by any workman for the asking, and strong boots which could be had on payment. Respondent knew that the spats and boots were available. Appellants had not ordered or advised respondent to wear protective clothing, as he was an experienced worker, and he knew and appreciated the risks of the metal splashing which attached to his work. In an action for damages against appellants, respondent alleged negligence on their part in failing to provide any proper spats or other sufficient protective clothing, and in failing to provide a safe system of work and safe and proper plant and equipment. The county court judge found that there had been a breach of duty at common law by appellants to respondent, but that respondent was guilty of contributory negligence, and that his share of the responsibility was seventy-five per cent. He expressed the view that, had he not been bound by authority, he would have decided that respondent was so experienced that he needed no warning, that what he did was with the full knowledge of all the risks involved, and that there was no negligence on the part of appellants: Held a failure of duty on the part of appellants, as employers of respondent had not been established, because respondent was an experienced moulder and by making protective spats available to him, to his knowledge, appellants had on the facts of this case sufficiently provided proper protective clothing and had fulfilled their duty to take reasonable care for his safety, despite the fact that they had not brought pressure to bear on him to wear the spats.
