---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:26 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:33 am
---

# XA v YA [2010] EWHC 1983 (QB)

## Summary

A claimant failed to establish that, in his childhood, his mother had owed him a common law duty of care to take reasonable steps to keep him safe from injury at the hands of his father, where the discharge of the duty would have involved the break-up of the family. It was undesirable for the civil courts to judge, retrospectively, the decisions of a mother about how best to ensure a secure upbringing for her children in the context of a claim for damages for negligence.

## Abstract

The claimant (X), a 32-year-old man, brought a claim for damages for personal injury against the defendant (Y), his mother.

X claimed that, during his childhood, Y had assaulted him directly and was jointly responsible with his father (Z) for assaults upon him by Z. X also claimed that Y had negligently failed to protect him from Z, as a result of which he suffered physical injury and long-term psychiatric damage. Z was a practising Catholic who had been brought up in a regime of harsh physical punishment. He adopted a similar regime in his own household, regularly striking his five children with implements including a clothes brush, a stick and a cane.

X argued that Y owed a common law duty of care to him to take reasonable steps to keep him safe from injury; the standard to be applied to the duty was the standard expected of a reasonable parent judged by the standards of the day. X submitted that Y was negligent in failing to obtain injunctive relief to keep Z away from the family home; failing to leave the family home with the children; failing to have the children looked after under a private family arrangement; or failing to have the children taken into care. Y submitted that she did not encourage or instigate assaults by Z; rather she tried to protect the children. She argued that she did not assault X but only lawfully chastised him on occasion. She submitted that she owed no common law duty of care to X, the duty he contended for was novel, and in any case the claim was statute barred by operation of the [Limitation Act 1980 s.11](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEAF63340E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default)).

## Held

Judgment for defendant.

(1) In relation to the limitation issue, the period of delay was 10 years. X had suffered from anxiety and other mental health problems during his teens. The delay in bringing proceedings was partially caused by psychological factors. X had a good reason for the delay. In relation to the claims in assault, the cogency of the evidence on behalf of both parties was such that the court could consider the claims without unfairness to Y. The court would exercise its discretion under [s.33](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEB0415F1E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1980 Act in favour of X. However, the position was different in relation to the negligence claim, as the defence depended almost entirely on Y's evidence. Y was genuinely bewildered by the proceedings, and was unable to assist beyond generalities. She lacked any ability to give a coherent account of the years in which she brought up her children. Her position was hopelessly prejudiced. In addition, the quality and quantity of the evidence was not sufficient to allow the court to come to any secure conclusions on the question of breach of duty. The claim in negligence was statute barred, _[A v Hoare [2008] UKHL 6, [2008] 1 A.C. 844, [2008] 1 WLUK 536](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D015B30CFC211DCA50594198FA8385C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed and _[B v Nugent Care Society [2009] EWCA Civ 827, [2010] 1 W.L.R. 516, [2009] 7 WLUK 757](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IECC578307CB611DE88A488FF86075653/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.

(2) The evidence showed that, over a period of approximately 10 years, X suffered beatings from Z, sometimes several times a week. On many occasions the punishment went beyond what was lawful and reasonable. However, the beating of the children by Z was not part of a "joint enterprise". The household ran according to Z's wishes; Y's views were irrelevant most of the time. Y did not seek or encourage brutal or excessive punishment for any of her children; she in fact reported Z's behaviour to the police, the clergy, social services and hospital authorities. Y's conduct in relation to her children was not part of a concerted action towards a common end, and she was not jointly responsible with Z for assaults on X, _[Sabaf SpA v MFI Furniture Centres Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 976, [2003] R.P.C. 14, [2002] 7 WLUK 334](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I970430F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.

(3) Although Y did strike the children from time to time, her conduct had been, at the most, lawful chastisement. X's claim of assault against her was dismissed.

(4) (Per curiam) The duty of care contended for by X was novel and should be treated with caution, _[Carmarthenshire CC v Lewis [1955] A.C. 549, [1955] 2 WLUK 68](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8285DF80E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Surtees v Kingston upon Thames RBC [1991] 2 F.L.R. 559, [1991] 3 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC6994850E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Seymour v Williams [1995] P.I.Q.R. P470, [1994] 11 WLUK 368](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA049B220E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Barrett v Enfield LBC [1998] Q.B. 367, [1997] 3 WLUK 574](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6FD37F00E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. To discharge it in the instant case would have involved, effectively, the break-up of the family. It would not be fair, just and reasonable to impose such a duty of care, _[Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman [1990] 2 A.C. 605, [1990] 2 WLUK 128](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I821B84F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. If correct, it would be imposed on the most vulnerable mothers in very difficult situations. It was doubtful whether the imposition of such a duty would improve the lives of children within the home. It was difficult enough for the family courts to make decisions about the care of children within the framework of the [Children Act 1989](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FF1A070E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0464e4c35c86479993fa99f98603a0db&contextData=(sc.Default)). It was undesirable for the ordinary civil courts to judge, retrospectively, the decisions of a mother about how best to ensure a secure upbringing for her children in the context of a claim for damages for negligence.
