---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:26 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:24 am
---

# A-G's Ref (No 2 of 1999) [2000] QB 796

GWT, a train operating company, had faced seven charges of manslaughter following a collision. The judge had ruled that it was a condition precedent to a conviction for corporate manslaughter by gross negligence, that a guilty mind and the guilt of an identified individual be proved. As a result, GWT was fined for not providing transport so as to ensure the public were not exposed to risks to their health and safety, and only the train driver was prosecuted. The Attorney General referred to the court two questions of law concerning evidence of GWT's state of mind, and secondly, evidence establishing the guilt of an identified individual for the same crime. The Attorney General contended that it was not necessary to inquire into GWT's state of mind and submitted that large companies should be as susceptible to conviction for manslaughter as one man companies. GWT contended that liability was based on the identification principle, which attributed to the company the mind and will of senior directors, and that the appropriate rule of attribution was determined with regard to whether Parliament had intended companies to be liable. The Attorney General argued that the law would be brought into disrepute if every act and state of mind of an employee was attributed to a blameless company, and that personal liability should be considered, _[Meridian Global Funds Management Asia Ltd v Securities Commission [1995] 2 A.C. 500, [1995] 6 WLUK 307](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF9374F60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bc77c03e7dec41dab43883f8aeb8b05e&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v British Steel Plc [1995] 1 W.L.R. 1356, [1994] 12 WLUK 306](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38BC9A00E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bc77c03e7dec41dab43883f8aeb8b05e&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Director General of Fair Trading v Pioneer Concrete (UK) Ltd [1995] 1 A.C. 456, [1994] 11 WLUK 339](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I99405AC0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bc77c03e7dec41dab43883f8aeb8b05e&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v Associated Octel Co Ltd [1996] 1 W.L.R. 1543, [1996] 11 WLUK 219](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2F985C71E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bc77c03e7dec41dab43883f8aeb8b05e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Gateway Foodmarkets Ltd [1997] 3 All E.R. 78, [1996] 12 WLUK 433](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I470B0420E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bc77c03e7dec41dab43883f8aeb8b05e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ cited.

Held, allowing the reference in part, that there was no evidence that the courts in their recent decisions had started to move from identification to personal liability as a basis for corporate liability for manslaughter. In relation to the rule of attribution, the courts had considered that the "directing mind and will" rule applied, thereby affirming the existence of the identification theory, _[Meridian Global Funds Management Asia Ltd v Securities Commission [1995] 2 A.C. 500, [1995] 6 WLUK 307](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF9374F60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bc77c03e7dec41dab43883f8aeb8b05e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. That approach was also consistent with the Law Commission's Report No.237 of March 4, 1996 entitled "Legislating the Criminal Code: Involuntary Manslaughter".
