---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:23 am
---

# Collins v Wilcock [1984] 3 All ER 374

A police officer grabbed a woman’s arm to prevent her from walking away without the power to do so. Lord Justice Robert Goff explained that a certain amount of physical contact must be accepted to move around in society, such as jostling in the supermarket, underground and busy street. However, the police officer’s action went beyond implied consent.

---

Where a police officer, without exercising his power of arrest, seeks to stop and detain a person with the actual or threatened use of force, the act of detention is unlawful; nor is there power to stop and detain a suspected prostitute for the purpose of cautioning her. The defendant and another person, a known prostitute, were seen by police officers apparently soliciting men in the street. The other woman agreed to be questioned, but the defendant refused and walked away. A police officer took her arm to restrain her when she swore at her. She then swore again and scratched the officer's arm. She was arrested and charged with assaulting a police officer in the execution of her duty contrary to the [Police Act 1964 s.51(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA05EDA41E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0631d0e7b01547d39c145c2567f3612c&contextData=(sc.Default)) . She was convicted of assault.

Held, allowing her appeal, that where a police officer sought to stop and detain another person and, without exercising his power of arrest, used force or the threat of force, actual or implicit, the act of detention was unlawful. Although the [Street Offences Act 1959 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I856BBE60E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0631d0e7b01547d39c145c2567f3612c&contextData=(sc.Default)) recognised the practice of cautioning a woman suspected of loitering or soliciting for the purpose of prostitution, there was no implied power to stop and detain to implement the system of cautioning. Therefore even if the officer, intended merely to carry out the cautioning procedure when she took hold of the defendant's arm, that action was unlawful and amounted to a battery since it went beyond the generally acceptable conduct of touching a person to engage their attention. Accordingly the conviction had to be quashed since the police officer was not acting in the course of her duty when she detained the defendant ( _[Rawlings v Till 150 E.R. 1042, [1837] 1 WLUK 2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE4D96AD0E57111DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0631d0e7b01547d39c145c2567f3612c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Kenlin v Gardiner [1967] 2 Q.B. 510, [1966] 11 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID262F8D0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0631d0e7b01547d39c145c2567f3612c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Donnelly v Jackman [1970] 1 W.L.R. 562, [1970] 1 WLUK 441](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I99F3A530E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0631d0e7b01547d39c145c2567f3612c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished).
