---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:23 am
---

# Inglis [2011] 1 WLR 1110

## Summary

In the first case of murder involving a mercy killing to reach the Court of Appeal, it was decided that the factors specified in the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 Sch.21 para.10(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDAD7ADF0E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=980e48c8434d4b0fb8dd22bd44ae72ba&contextData=(sc.Default)), (b) and (d), which would normally aggravate the offence of murder, should not be taken to aggravate a murder committed by an individual who genuinely believed that her actions in bringing about the death constituted an act of mercy.

## Abstract

The appellant (X) appealed against her conviction for the attempted murder and murder of her son (V) and against the nine-year minimum term of her mandatory life sentence.

V, who had been a fit young man, had been taken to hospital by ambulance following a fight. During the journey, the back doors of the ambulance opened and he fell out, suffering catastrophic head injuries. He underwent two operations to remove parts of his skull to relieve pressure on his brain. He was left severely disfigured and in need of long-term dependent care. A consultant advised V's family that the signs were encouraging that he could go on to live an independent life. X, who had previously suffered from depression, was very distressed by the whole situation. She refused to believe the medical opinion and expressed wishes to put V out of his misery and end his pain. Her behaviour became increasingly erratic and irrational. Two months later, she tried to kill V by injecting him with heroin as he lay in his hospital bed. V was resuscitated but suffered a further consequential deterioration in his condition. X was charged with attempted murder but released on bail subject to a condition not to visit V. A year later, after carefully planning how to gain access to V, she again injected him with heroin and he died. X was diagnosed as suffering from a depressive disorder with symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder. At trial, she maintained that she had performed an act of mercy to put V out of his misery, which was her duty as his mother.

X submitted that the judge had been wrong to withdraw the issue of provocation from the jury.

## Held

Appeal against conviction dismissed, appeal against sentence allowed in part.

(1) The judge had been correct to withdraw the issue of provocation from the jury. X had been subjected to great stress and anguish but there was no evidence that she had lost her self-control when she injected V with the fatal dose of heroin. All the evidence showed that she had planned to kill her son with meticulous care and was fulfilling her long-standing objective. The appeal against conviction was not arguable (see para.[36](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) The law of murder did not distinguish between murder committed for malevolent reasons and murder motivated by familial love. Mercy killing was murder. The [Criminal Justice Act 2003 Sch.21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDAD45290E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=980e48c8434d4b0fb8dd22bd44ae72ba&contextData=(sc.Default)) set out the starting points for setting the minimum term and the aggravating and mitigating factors to be taken into account. The starting point would have been 15 years. Three of the aggravating factors in para.10 of Sch.21 would be present in virtually every mercy killing: "(a) a significant degree of planning or premeditation"; "(b) the fact that the victim was particularly vulnerable because of disability"; and "(d) the abuse of a position of trust". The only reference to mercy killing appeared under the specific mitigating factors in para.11 of Sch.21: "a belief by the offender that the murder was an act of mercy". Those statutory provisions presented a problem as it was wholly unrealistic to treat precisely the same actions as both aggravating and mitigating factors. The instant case was the first case of murder involving a mercy killing to reach the Court of Appeal, and reflecting on the realities, the factors specified in para.10(a), (b) and (d) which would normally aggravate the offence of murder, should not be taken to aggravate a murder committed by an individual who genuinely believed that her actions in bringing about the death constituted an act of mercy. Further features of mitigation were present in the instant case: X's depression and post-traumatic stress disorder diminished her ability to view V's condition in an objective way and reduced her ability to cope with the awful stress likely to be imposed on any loving parent. However, her culpability was reduced but not extinguished. Some factors aggravated her offences: V had been helpless; X's actions had been premeditated; her first attempt had caused a deterioration in V's condition so that she had contributed to his suffering; and she had no remorse for what she had done. Having reflected on all the relevant considerations, the minimum term should be reduced to five years (paras [37, 47-61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
