---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:22 am
---

# NCB v Gamble [1959] 1 QB 11

Per Devlin, J.: "A person who supplies the instrument for a crime or anything essential to its commission aids in the commission of it; and if he does so knowingly and with intent to aid, he abets it as well and is therefore guilty of aiding and abetting. I use the word 'supplies' to comprehend giving, lending, selling or any other transfer of the right of property… . In the transfer of property there must be either a physical delivery or a positive act of assent to a taking… . Aiding and abetting is a crime that requires proof of mens rea, that is to say, of intention to aid as well as of knowledge of the circumstances, and … proof of intent involves proof of a positive act of assistance voluntarily done."M, an employee of a firm of hauliers, took his lorry to a colliery to collect coal on behalf of buyers. The lorry was filled with coal from a hopper. M then drove the lorry from the hopper to the weigh-bridge, where H, the operator of the weigh-bridge and an employee of the National Coal Board, weighed the lorry and its load and told M that the load was nearly four tons overweight. M, saying that he would risk taking the overload, took the weigh-bridge ticket from H and left the colliery premises. M was later stopped by the police, and his firm convicted of contravening the Motor Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1955 . The board were charged with aiding and abetting the firm in the commission of the offence. At the trial before the magistrates, no evidence was called on behalf of the board. The board was convicted and appealed to the Divisional Court by case stated.

Held, the crime of aiding and abetting was committed on proof of a positive act of assistance, voluntarily done, and knowledge of the circumstances constituting the offence, the question of motive being irrelevant; the property in the coal did not pass until the coal was weighed and the weigh-bridge ticket handed to M; the completion of the sale, at that moment, by H, as agent for the board, with the knowledge that an offence was going to be committed, made the board aiders and abettors. _[Ackroyd's Air Travel v DPP [1950] 1 All E.R. 933, [1950] 3 WLUK 63](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I47D882C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9e32e8ae59424b80938e4340f89e7447&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.
