---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:16 am
---

# R v O’Flaherty [2004] Cr App R 20

The applicant (O) applied for permission to adduce fresh evidence and to appeal against his conviction of offences of perverting the course of justice and of perjury. O had been convicted on the basis that, in the course of his duties as a police officer, he had made false witness statements and had given false evidence in support of a prosecution. O had arrested a woman who had later been convicted of an offence of being in charge of a motor vehicle after consuming alcohol beyond the statutory limit, contrary to the [Road Traffic Act 1988 s.5(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I75363D61E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15e0389918ca4376a70b76943cea56be&contextData=(sc.Search)) . Although the vehicle had been parked wholly in a private driveway, and was therefore beyond the scope of s.5(1)(b) of the Act, the conviction had been secured on the basis of O's evidence that the vehicle had been parked in a public place. O's subsequent explanation that he had made an honest mistake caused by the pressure of overwork had not been accepted at his trial. O sought to adduce character evidence, and medical evidence to the effect that he had been suffering either from post traumatic stress syndrome or from a depressive episode, either of which was consistent with forgetfulness, loss of concentration and a deterioration in his ability to do his job properly. O argued that the fresh evidence was capable of supporting his case that he had not dishonestly tailored his statements and evidence to support the charge brought, and showed that his conviction was unsafe.

Held, refusing the applications, that O's conviction was not unsafe and the fresh evidence was not admitted. The medical evidence which O sought to adduce met the criteria set out in the [Criminal Appeal Act 1968 s.23(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID4BB16A0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15e0389918ca4376a70b76943cea56be&contextData=(sc.Search)) : it was capable of belief; afforded grounds for allowing an appeal; would have been admissible in the court below; and any failure to adduce it at an earlier stage was not the fault of O. A jury hearing that evidence might reasonably have concluded that O may have been suffering from one of the conditions described. However, O's misstatements were such that they were not capable of being explained by innocent misrecollection. The medical evidence as a whole was not capable of leading a jury to the conclusion that what O had said might have been caused by whatever medical condition he was experiencing at the time. The additional character evidence simply confirmed O's good character as a police officer. At the time of his trial O had been treated as a person of impeccable character and the jury had been given the customary direction as to the ways in which his good character counted in his favour. The jury had fundamentally disbelieved O and the additional character evidence would not have caused them to take a different view.
