---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:22 am
---

# R v Barnes [2005] WLR 910

HELD: The Court of Appeal said that in organised sport, criminal prosecution should be reserved for those situations where the conduct was sufficiently grave properly to be categorised as criminal. If what occurred went beyond what a player could reasonably be regarded as having accepted by taking part in the sport, this would indicate that the conduct was not covered by the defence of consent. Whether conduct reached this level depended on all the circumstances, which included the type of sport, the level at which it was played, the nature of the act, the degree of force used, the extent of the risk of injury, and the state of mind of the defendant. In highly competitive sports, conduct outside the rules might be expected to occur in the heat of the moment; the fact that such conduct was penalised and even resulted in a warning or a sending off, did not necessarily mean that the threshold level required for it to be regarded as criminal had been reached. Here, V had sustained a serious leg injury as a result of a late tackle by D in a football match. The jury needed to consider whether the contact had been so obviously late and/or violent that it was not to be regarded as an instinctive reaction, error or misjudgement in the heat of the game.

---

## Summary

The criminal prosecution of those who had inflicted injury on another in the course of a sporting event was reserved for those situations where the conduct was sufficiently grave to be properly categorised as criminal.

## Abstract

The appellant (B) appealed against his conviction for unlawfully and maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, contrary to the [Offences against the Person Act 1861 s.20](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0BF9A7E1E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b06b0d8c69bb428b848f58d2a8824850&contextData=(sc.Search)). The victim had sustained a serious leg injury as a result of a tackle by B during a football match. The tackle occurred after the victim had kicked the ball into the opposition net. While accepting that the tackle was hard, B maintained that it was a fair challenge and that the injury caused was accidental. The appeal raised the issue of when it was appropriate for criminal proceedings to be instituted after an injury had been caused to one player by another in the course of a sporting event. B argued that the judge's summing up had been inadequate.

Held, allowing the appeal, that the criminal prosecution of those who had inflicted injury on another in the course of a sporting event was reserved for those situations where the conduct was sufficiently grave to be properly categorised as criminal. Where injuries were sustained in the course of contact sports, such as football, public policy limited the availability of the defence of consent to situations where there had been implicit consent to what had occurred, _[R. v Brown (Anthony Joseph) [1994] 1 A.C. 212, [1993] 3 WLUK 189](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DEA0F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b06b0d8c69bb428b848f58d2a8824850&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[R. v Dica (Mohammed) [2004] EWCA Crim 1103, [2004] Q.B. 1257, [2004] 5 WLUK 53](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3F9BA280E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b06b0d8c69bb428b848f58d2a8824850&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered. Whether conduct reached the required threshold to be criminal would depend on all the circumstances. The fact that the play had been within the rules and practice of the game and had not gone beyond it would be a firm indication that what had occurred was not criminal. However, in highly competitive sports, where conduct outside the rules could be expected to occur in the heat of the moment, such conduct might not reach the threshold level required for it to be criminal. That level was an objective one which would be determined by the type of sport, the level at which it was played, the nature of the act, the degree of force used, the extent of the risk of injury and the state of mind of the defendant. For an offence under s.20, it was a requirement that the act was not only unlawful but also "malicious". This could involve no more than that the defendant foresaw the risk of bodily harm. In a sport such as football, anyone going to tackle another player in possession of the ball could be expected to have had such foresight; it might therefore confuse the jury for the trial judge to make unnecessary reference to the word "maliciously" and to invite them to consider the improbability that the defendant had not foreseen the risk. It would be prudent for him to discuss this subject with counsel before he began his summing up. In the instant case, the summing up by the judge had been inadequate in that he had failed to explain to them, inter alia, that the fact the tackle was a foul did not necessarily mean the threshold of criminal conduct had been reached; why it had been important to determine where the ball was at the time the tackle took place; and the distinction between going for the ball, albeit late, and "going for" the victim.
