---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:29 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:16 am
---

# R v Rose [2017] EWCA Crim 1168

Rose had performed a routine sight test on a seven year old boy, but failed to use an ophthalmoscope to view his optic nerves. Rose had a duty to do this internal examination which would have revealed he was suffering from hydrocephalus. At her trial it was found that a competent optometrist would have carried out such an examination and having done so would have seen that the optic nerve was swollen and immediately referred the boy for medical treatment which would have saved his life. In the event the boy’s condition was not detected in time and he died.

The Court of Appeal held that test for the fourth element of gross negligence manslaughter was whether a reasonable and competent optometrist would have seen an obvious and serious risk at the time of the breach of duty. It was not whether a reasonable and competent optometrist would have seen an obvious and serious risk if she had not breached her duty. This criteria had not been fulfilled in Rose’s case. A mere possibility that an assessment might reveal something life-threatening was not the same as an obvious risk of death: an obvious risk was a present risk which was clear and unambiguous not one which might become apparent on further investigation.

---

## Summary

An optometrist was not guilty of the gross negligence manslaughter of a young boy where she had breached her statutory duty of care to examine the internal structure of his eyes as part of a routine eye examination and consequently failed to identify an abnormality on the optic nerve which ultimately led to his death. That was not enough to found a case of gross negligence manslaughter as there had not been a "serious and obvious risk of death" at the time of the breach.

## Abstract

The appellant optometrist appealed against her conviction of gross negligence manslaughter.

In February 2012, she conducted a routine eye test and examination on a boy (V) aged seven. She recorded no issues of concern. Pursuant to the [Opticians Act 1989 s.26(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC6460A50E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6fbbfcb202474ef09e4d3ad564f97622&contextData=(sc.Default)), an optometrist had a statutory duty of care to examine the internal eye structure as part of a routine eye examination, to detect signs of abnormality or disease including life threatening problems evident from the optic nerve. Five months after the examination, while at school, V was taken ill. He died in hospital later the same day. Expert opinion was that the cause of V's death was acute hydrocephalus, and that the obstruction in his brain had been a longstanding chronic problem, although he had not presented with many associated symptoms. His condition was said to have been treatable up to the point of acute deterioration and death. The appellant maintained that she had had problems with her examination of V as he had had poor fixation and slight photophobia. She accepted that her failure to examine the back of the eye without a good reason was a breach of her duty of care. Retinal images taken of V's eyes during the sight test showed swelling of the optic nerve. The experts agreed that a competent optometrist would have known the significance of that swelling and would immediately have referred the case on to others. The judge rejected a submission of no case to answer, determining that the appellant had failed to conduct a full internal examination of V's eyes, there was no good reason for that failure, and thus she had breached her duty of care. He further found that the risk of death caused by the breach of duty was reasonably foreseeable. He directed the jury to consider whether that risk would have been obvious to a reasonably competent optometrist with the knowledge that the appellant would have had "if she had not acted in breach of her duty to investigate the true position"; and in addition, whether her conduct was so bad as to amount to a criminal omission.

The appellant submitted that the submission of no case to answer was wrongly rejected because the judge had applied the wrong test, and in addition that the judge had erred in his directions to the jury as to the elements of gross negligence manslaughter.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The court summarised the relevant principles in relation to gross negligence manslaughter, _[R. v Adomako (John Asare) [1995] 1 A.C. 171, [1994] 6 WLUK 393](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2ED0EDC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6fbbfcb202474ef09e4d3ad564f97622&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed, _[R. v Singh (Gurphal) Times, April 17, 1999, [1999] 2 WLUK 360](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69D73FF1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6fbbfcb202474ef09e4d3ad564f97622&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Attorney General's Reference (No.2 of 1999) [2000] Q.B. 796, [2000] 2 WLUK 561](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6A1E0260E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6fbbfcb202474ef09e4d3ad564f97622&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Rudling (Joanne) [2016] EWCA Crim 741, (2016) 151 B.M.L.R. 79, [2016] 6 WLUK 513](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I98DAC9F0948711E69F46E55AD20ABCED/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6fbbfcb202474ef09e4d3ad564f97622&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Accordingly, in assessing either the foreseeability of risk or the grossness of the conduct in question, the court was not entitled to take into account information which would, could or should have been available to a defendant following the breach of duty in question. The test was objective and prospective. Were the situation otherwise, it would fundamentally undermine the established legal test of foreseeability in gross negligence manslaughter which required proof of a "serious and obvious risk of death" at the time of the breach. The implications for medical and other professions would be serious because people would be guilty of gross negligence manslaughter by reason of negligent omissions to carry out routine eye, blood and other tests which in fact would have revealed fatal conditions notwithstanding that the circumstances were such that it was not reasonably foreseeable that failure to carry out such tests would carry an obvious and serious risk of death (see paras [53-60, 67-75, 77-78, 94](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) The judge had confused or elided two separate matters: the appellant's actual knowledge at the time of the breach, and the putative knowledge of the reasonably prudent optometrist in the appellant's position at the time. They were different concepts; the first being subjective and the second objective. The test of reasonable foreseeability was objective. It simply required the notional exercise of putting a reasonably prudent professional in the shoes of the person whose conduct was under scrutiny and asking whether, at the moment of the breach of the duty relied on, that person ought reasonably to have foreseen an obvious and serious risk of death. The factual matrix was critical. At its highest, what a reasonably prudent optometrist would or should have known at the time of the instant breach was that, if he or she did not carry out a proper examination of the back of V's eyes, there remained the possibility that signs of potentially life-threatening disease or abnormality might be missed. That was not enough to found a case of gross negligence manslaughter since there had to be a "serious and obvious risk of death" at the time of the breach (paras [84-86](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) The court did not condone the negligence that the jury found to have been established in relation to the way that the appellant examined V and failed to identify the defect which ultimately led to his death. That serious breach of duty was a matter for her regulator. However, it did not constitute the crime of gross negligence manslaughter (para.[95](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
