---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:21 am
---

# R v BM [2018] EWCA Crim 560

## Summary

Body modification, such as the removal of an ear or nipple, or tongue splitting, performed on a consenting adult by a practitioner with no medical training or qualification, could not form an exception to the general rule in _[R. v Brown (Anthony Joseph) [1994] 1 A.C. 212, [1993] 3 WLUK 189](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DEA0F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0596c31cbbcf47cbb566e3f423df6d6f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that consent was no defence to causing actual bodily harm or wounding. Even if Parliament or the Supreme Court revisited the general rule and a different line was drawn to allow consent to act as a defence to causing actual bodily harm and wounding, body modification caused really serious harm.

## Abstract

The appellant appealed against a ruling that consent could provide no defence against three charges of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.

The appellant was a registered tattooist and body piercer who also did body modification. He had no medical qualifications. The three counts were based on the following procedures that he had performed, all without anaesthetic: removal of a customer's ear; removal of a customer's nipple; and splitting a customer's tongue to resemble a reptile's tongue. Body modification, which encompassed those procedures, was unregulated and those practising it required no particular training or qualification. The prosecution accepted that the customers had consented. The judge, in deciding that consent could not provide a defence, relied on _[R. v Brown (Anthony Joseph) [1994] 1 A.C. 212, [1993] 3 WLUK 189](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DEA0F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0596c31cbbcf47cbb566e3f423df6d6f&contextData=(sc.Default))_, which held that consent was no defence to causing actual bodily harm or wounding, unless the conduct fell into a special exception to the general rule.

The appellant accepted that Brown was correct and binding, but submitted that it should be distinguished on the basis that it was concerned with sado-masochistic activity; he submitted that his conduct should be permitted for good reason, namely that it protected the personal autonomy of his customers. He contended that his procedures were not medical or surgical, and should be viewed as akin to body adornment, which was widely accepted, and a natural extension of tattooing and piercing, which did not attract criminal liability. Accordingly, the procedures, although they caused really serious bodily harm, should be immunised from the criminal law of assault, as were surgical procedures performed by medical practitioners and those who took part in properly organised boxing matches.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

The exceptions to the general rule confirmed in Brown delivered no easily articulated principle by which any novel situation could be judged. The difficulty was perhaps best illustrated by considering boxing, undoubtedly lawful when organised properly as a sport, where each protagonist was at liberty to knock out his opponent, sometimes causing very serious injury. The most that might be said about the special cases was that they represented a balance struck by the judges to reflect a series of different interests. Society had a general interest in limiting the approbation of the law for significant violence, albeit inflicted with consent. There was some need to protect from themselves those who had consented, particularly because they might be vulnerable or even mentally unwell. Moreover, serious injury, even consented to, carried a risk of unwanted injury, disease or even death. Yet there was a need to reflect society's general values, which had long accepted tattooing and piercing, ritual circumcision, sports and other categories. There were two features that might be thought to underpin almost all of the exceptions to the general rule. First, they might produce discernible social benefit, for example, sports and even boxing or dangerous exhibitions as entertainment, and religious rituals. Secondly, it would simply be regarded as unreasonable for the common law to criminalise the activity if engaged in with consent by or on behalf of the injured party. That would apply to tattooing and piercing and perhaps to those exceptions with a religious hue, including ritual male circumcision. New exceptions should not be recognised on a case-by-case basis, save perhaps where there was a close analogy with an existing exception. The recognition of an entirely new exception would involve a value judgment that was policy-laden, and on which there might be powerful conflicting views in society: a criminal trial was inapt to deal with that. There was no proper analogy between body modification, which involved the removal of body parts or mutilation, and tattooing, piercing and other body adornment. What the appellant had undertaken was a series of medical procedures performed for no medical reason and with none of the protections provided to patients by medical practitioners, _[Attorney General's Reference (No.6 of 1980) [1981] Q.B. 715, [1981] 5 WLUK 44](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6A7C00E1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0596c31cbbcf47cbb566e3f423df6d6f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The protection of the public extended beyond the risks of infection, bungled surgery or an inability to deal with complications. The appellant's customers had sought irreversible surgery without anaesthetic with profound long-term consequences. The fact that the desire to have an ear or nipple removed or tongue split was incomprehensible to most might not be sufficient in itself to raise the question of the need for a mental health assessment. Yet the first response in almost every other context to those who sought to harm themselves would be to suggest medical assistance. There were good reasons why reputable medical practitioners would not remove a patient's body parts simply when asked. The personal autonomy of the appellant's customers did not justify removing body modification from the ambit of the law of assault. They could have cut off or altered their own body parts without committing an offence, but their personal autonomy did not extend to involving another in those acts, _[Laskey v United Kingdom (1997) 24 E.H.R.R. 39, [1997] 2 WLUK 339](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7641991E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0596c31cbbcf47cbb566e3f423df6d6f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. There was no good reason why body modification should be placed in a special category of exemption from the general rule. Even if the general rule was revisited by Parliament or the Supreme Court and a different line drawn that allowed consent to act as a defence to causing actual bodily harm and wounding, body modification caused really serious harm. Even the dissenting judges in Brown would not have been willing to allow consent to act as a defence to causing grievous, or serious, bodily harm, and neither would the Law Commission's proposals in Consultation Papers 134 and 139. The appellant's argument envisaged consent to surgical treatment providing a defence to the person performing the surgery whether or not he was suitably medically qualified and whether or not there was any medical justification for it. Such a bold step could only be taken by Parliament, Brown followed (see paras [24, 32, 38-45](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).
