---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:21 am
---

# R v Clegg [1995] 1 AC 482

A soldier or police officer who, in the course of his duty, kills a person by the use of excessive and unreasonable force in self-defence is guilty of murder, not manslaughter. A was a British soldier stationed in Northern Ireland. While on patrol at night with other members of his unit a stolen car was stopped at a vehicle checkpoint. The car accelerated away in the centre of the road, with its headlights full on, towards A and three other members of the patrol. Someone at the checkpoint shouted to stop the car and A and his three colleagues opened fire at the approaching car. The driver and a rear seat passenger were killed, the passenger having been hit in the back by a bullet fired from A's rifle. A was charged with the murder of the passenger. His defence was that he fired in self-defence. After a trial before a judge alone A was convicted of murder. His appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed. The Court of Appeal held that the firing of the shot which killed the passenger was, on the facts found by the judge, a grossly excessive and disproportionate use of force, and that any tribunal of fact properly directed would so have found. A appealed to the House of Lords on a certified question of law, namely, whether a soldier on duty, who kills a person with the requisite intention for murder, but who would be entitled to rely on self-defence but for the use of excessive force, is guilty of murder or manslaughter.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that

(1) where a plea of selfdefence to a charge of murder failed because the force used was excessive and unreasonable, the homicide could not be reduced from murder to manslaughter;

(2) accordingly it followed that a soldier or police officer who, in the course of his duty, killed a person by firing a shot which constituted the use of excessive and unreasonable force in self-defence was guilty of murder not manslaughter ( _[Palmer (Sigismund) v Queen, The [1971] A.C. 814, [1971] 2 WLUK 81](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I197C4410E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a7a9f9cc3c0b4b63bba39cf5983dd951&contextData=(sc.Default))_ ; _[R. v McInnes (Walter) [1971] 1 W.L.R. 1600, [1971] 7 WLUK 135](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I59AF5AE0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a7a9f9cc3c0b4b63bba39cf5983dd951&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed; _[Attorney General of Northern Ireland's Reference (No.1 of 1975), Re [1977] A.C. 105, [1976] 7 WLUK 32](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69C58220E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a7a9f9cc3c0b4b63bba39cf5983dd951&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Zecevic v DPP (Victoria) 162 C.L.R. 645, [1988] 1 WLUK 586](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAD4F9440E4B811DAB61499BEED25CD3B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a7a9f9cc3c0b4b63bba39cf5983dd951&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered). [Per curiam: There is no general defence known to English law of acting in obedience to superior orders.]
