---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:19 am
---

# R v Forrester [1992] Crim LR 792

FACTS: F was a tenant of W who had retained F's deposit on termination of the tenancy. F and others burst into the premises and removed some of W's property. Evidence suggested that while on the premises F could have been attacked by W. The judge told the jury:

> '… if F went in as a trespasser, though, how can he possibly say that he was being unlawfully attacked when W rushed at him, and if he was not unlawfully attacked when W rushed at him, how can there be any room for any suggestion that he was merely defending himself by any blow that he might have struck subsequently? Well, it is a matter for you. You have got to try this case according to the evidence.'

HELD: His appeal against conviction for assault was allowed. It was held that this direction was, in effect, removing from the jury's consideration the issue of whether or not F was attacked by W, in such a way as to entitle him to use reasonable force to defend himself. Whether or not F was a trespasser did not entitle W to use excessive force to remove him. F would be entitled to rely on self-defence if W used excessive force in attempting to remove him, if that was what W was trying to do.

---

F and a co-accused were charged with robbery of W, F's former landlord, who had retained F's deposit on the termination of his tenancy. F and the co-accused returned some weeks after that termination, and when W opened the door, they burst in and, while the co-accused restrained W, F removed property belonging to W. F claimed that the deposit had been withheld unfairly, but he had been told that if he went to court, the amount recovered would not cover his costs. He knew that he had no right to remove the property, but wanted to retain it for a few days for bargaining purposes with W. If W would not return the deposit, he would have suggested that he sell the items. He said he thought that what he did was fair and honest. Regarding the assault charge, F said that W attacked him and F defended himself. The trial judge said to the jury: " if he went in as a trespasser though, how can he possibly say that he was being unlawfully attacked when W rushed at him, and if he was not being unlawfully attacked, how can there be any room for any suggestion that he was merely defending himself ?". F was convicted of robbery and assault, and appealed on the grounds that the judge had not given a proper direction on dishonesty and that he had removed matters from the jury's consideration.

Held, dismissing the appeal against the robbery conviction and allowing the appeal against the assault conviction, that (1) the direction on the first limb of Ghosh had been perfectly proper. In referring to moral justification for actions, the judge had said that there could be no justification by the ordinary principles of honesty if a person realised that his actions were contrary to the standards of ordinary decent folk. Further, while a charge of robbery might, in an appropriate case, require a further direction in accordance with the principle in the [Theft Act 1968, s.2(1)(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF664250E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ccda04d24d4b878d8954f0da9144c2&contextData=(sc.Default)), that is that an appropriation would not be regarded as dishonest if an item was taken with a belief that there was a legal right to take it, this was not such a case.clearly accepted that he had no right to take the property, and that it was unlawful so to do (_[R. v Ghosh (Deb Baran) [1982] Q.B. 1053, [1982] 4 WLUK 44](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I472988A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ccda04d24d4b878d8954f0da9144c2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ cited); (2) the judge had effectively removed from the jury the questions, which they were entitled to consider, of whether F was indeed a trespasser when he returned to W's property, and whether W used excessive force, which he was not entitled to do, in trying to remove him, thus entitling F to use reasonable force to defend himself. The conviction for assault was quashed but the conviction for robbery stood.
