---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:29 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:15 am
---

# R v Shivpuri [1987] AC 1

FACTS: D was arrested with a suitcase. He admitted that it contained illegal drugs. It turned out that the contents of the suitcase were not drugs.

HELD: He was convicted of attempting to knowingly be concerned in dealing with a prohibited drug contrary to section 1(1) Criminal Attempts Act 1981. The conviction was upheld by the House of Lords.

---

It is no defence for a defendant charged with a criminal attempt for him to say that it would in fact have been impossible to commit the crime ( _[Anderton v Ryan [1985] A.C. 560, [1985] 5 WLUK 93](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5E0515E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8fe3575a77d14d73afeca8d3f791e6f5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled). The appellant was tried on counts of attempting to be knowingly concerned in dealing with and harbouring a controlled drug, namely heroin, contrary to the [Criminal Attempts Act 1981 s.1(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0BAEAA40E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8fe3575a77d14d73afeca8d3f791e6f5&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the [Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 s.170(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6DFF270E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8fe3575a77d14d73afeca8d3f791e6f5&contextData=(sc.Default)) . He was carrying a package containing a powdered substance and more such was found at his flat. The prosecution case was that he admitted having drugs in police interview and in a statement under caution stated that he very deeply suspected that the substance was heroin. In fact it was a vegetable material akin to snuff. In evidence he denied making any admission and denied that the statement under caution amounted to a confession. He was found guilty and appealed on the grounds that because the substance was not a drug he could not be guilty in law. His appeal was dismissed by the Court of Appeal and by the House of Lords.

Held, that (1) in order to prove a charge under s.170(1) of the 1979 Act of being knowingly concerned in harbouring or dealing with goods the importation of which was prohibited, it was sufficient to prove that the person knew that the goods concerned were prohibited goods and no proof was required that he knew the goods to be of a particular category, irrespective of the different penalties attaching to the importation of different categories of prohibited goods. Accordingly, it was immaterial that the appellant was unsure of the exact nature of the substance in his possession, in that in any event he believed he was dealing with controlled drugs the importation of which was prohibited ( _[R. v Hussain (Mohammed Blayat) [1969] 2 Q.B. 567, [1969] 5 WLUK 7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D4ABF60E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8fe3575a77d14d73afeca8d3f791e6f5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved); (2) on the true construction of s.1 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 the actus reus of the statutory offence of attempt required an act which was more than merely preparatory to the commission of an offence and which the defendant did with the intention of committing an offence, notwithstanding that the commission of the actual offence was, on the true facts, impossible. The appellant had on the facts of the case been rightly convicted; (3) the distinction which the House of Lords had previously drawn in regard to s.1 between acts which were "objectively innocent" and those which were not, could not be maintained. Anderton v Ryan had been wrongly decided and since it was indistinguishable from the present case would be departed from under the _[Practice Statement (HL: Judicial Precedent) [1966] 1 W.L.R. 1234, [1966] 7 WLUK 84](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I285E3BA0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8fe3575a77d14d73afeca8d3f791e6f5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ . Per Lord Hailsham, Lord Elwyn-Jones and Lord Mackay: Even if the Practice Statement had not been applied, the appeal would still have been dismissed by distinguishing the facts of the present case from those in Anderton v Ryan, on the basis that the appellant was guilty on the clear wording of section 1(1) and (2) of the 1981 Act and that no recourse was therefore necessary to the wording of section 1(3), which would be irrelevant.
