---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:20 am
---

# R v Dowds [2012] EWCA Crim 281

FACTS: The defendant, a binge drinker, stabbed his partner after a night of heavy drinking. He tried to run the defence of diminished responsibility on the basis that he was suffering from a recognised medical condition, namely 'Acute Voluntary Intoxication'. Dowds was not arguing that he was an alcoholic, and there was no evidence to suggest it. The trial judge concluded that this could not give rise to the defence and did not put it to the jury.

Dowds argued that the changes made to the defence by the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, s 52 meant that it was possible to raise the defence of diminished responsibility based on voluntary intoxication because such intoxication is recognised as a medical condition in both the World Health Organization's International and Statistical Classification of Diseases (ICD) and the American Medical Associations Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM).

HELD: The Court of Appeal noted that both the ICD and DSM recognised a number of medical conditions that would give rise to significant problems if raised as issues in legal cases, including 'unhappiness', 'irritability and anger', and 'intermittent explosive disorder'. However, they also noted that the DSM itself, in its introduction, warned against a rigid application of the categories of medical condition to legal issues. It also briefly reviewed the long history of legal principles that showed, with exceptions, that the law generally does not allow voluntary intoxication to afford any defence to criminal liability. They said that the changes brought about by the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 to the defence were recommended by the Law Commission, who nevertheless observed that generally the law as it formerly read worked well, and no major changes were required. They therefore concluded that there was nothing to suggest that Parliament, by bringing into force the changes in the CJA 2009, intended to reverse the long-standing rule that voluntary intoxication cannot give rise to a defence.

---

## Summary

The re-formulation of the statutory conditions for diminished responsibility within the [Homicide Act 1957 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7809FE30E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a359e16cdfa4201a832788a886e0e2d&contextData=(sc.Default)) had not been intended to reverse the well-established rule that voluntary acute intoxication, whether from alcohol or any other substance, was not capable of founding the partial defence of diminished responsibility.

## Abstract

The appellant offender (D) appealed against a judge's decision that voluntarily and temporary intoxication was not capable of founding the partial defence of diminished responsibility.

D was a habitual heavy drinker. He had been drinking heavily when he had an argument with his partner and killed her. D had inflicted 60 knife wounds to the deceased. Nearly two days later, D phoned the police to report his partner's death. At the outset of the trial the judge ruled that voluntary and temporary drunkenness could not found the defence of diminished responsibility under the [Homicide Act 1957s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60953370E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a359e16cdfa4201a832788a886e0e2d&contextData=(sc.Default)). Therefore, diminished responsibility was not left to the jury. The [Coroners and Justice Act 2009](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69823050DA4211DEB7FDF517E142DA0B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a359e16cdfa4201a832788a886e0e2d&contextData=(sc.Default)) amended s.2 of the 1957 Act so that of an "abnormality of mental functioning arising from an underlying condition" became an "abnormality of mental functioning arising from a recognised medical condition". At trial D asserted that he had been drunk at the time of the killing and therefore could not form the necessary intent or remember anything about the offence. The jury found that D had intended serious harm and rejected the partial defence of loss of control.

D submitted that acute intoxication was acknowledged as a "recognised medical condition" by virtue of its classification in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), and that as he was suffering from it when he killed his partner and it could well have affected the functions listed in [s.2(1A)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7809FE30E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a359e16cdfa4201a832788a886e0e2d&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1957 Act, diminished responsibility should have been left to the jury.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

D's argument bypassed the clear general law against which the amendment to s.2 of the 1957 Act was enacted. The s.2 amendment had not disturbed the exception which prevented a defendant from relying on voluntary drunkenness, save upon the limited question of whether specific intent had been formed, _[R. v Wood (Clive) [2008] EWCA Crim 1305, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 496, [2008] 6 WLUK 510](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I823D4A8041AF11DDBA6DEC4A5C606B86/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a359e16cdfa4201a832788a886e0e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[DPP v Majewski [1977] A.C. 443, [1976] 4 WLUK 71](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AF95560E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2a359e16cdfa4201a832788a886e0e2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.

Had Parliament intended to alter the law, it would have made its intention explicitly clear. Such an intention could not be inferred from the adoption of the new formulation of the expression "recognised medical condition", as the origins of that had been clearly explained by the Law Commission and they explicitly did not include writing the terms of the ICD or the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual into the legislation, for which purpose those terms were demonstrably unsuited. It was possible that there might be genuine mental conditions, which were not the fault of the defendant and well recognised by doctors, which although temporary might be within the ambit of the 1957 Act.

There was no occasion in the instant case for a definitive analysis of the circumstances in which the principle of strict construction of penal statutes would or would not be applied. There were no circumstances in which it could not be envisaged that any citizen might order his affairs on the basis of a misunderstanding of the partial defence of diminished responsibility. Killing with the intent to kill or with the intent to cause grievous bodily and without justification had to occur before diminished responsibility could arise. Murder was a serious offence and there was no risk of its legal character being misunderstood. The re-formulation of the statutory conditions for diminished responsibility had not been intended to reverse the well-established rule that voluntary acute intoxication was not capable of being relied upon to found diminished responsibility. The presence of a recognised medical condition was a necessary, but not always a sufficient, condition to raise the defence (see paras [13, 17, 35, 38-41](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).
