---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:17 am
---

# R v Kay [2017] EWCA Crim 647

## Summary

A person suffering from schizophrenia who killed while intoxicated could rely on the defence of diminished responsibility if their condition was of such severity that, even without intoxication, it would have impaired their responsibility. They could also rely on the defence if the schizophrenia was coupled with drink or drug dependence which together substantially impaired responsibility.

## Abstract

In joined appeals the second appellant (Kay) appealed against his conviction for murder and sought permission to appeal against sentence. The first appellant (Joyce) appealed against his sentence.

Kay was a paranoid schizophrenic. He knew that drug use triggered and exacerbated his symptoms, but was a habitual drug-user. He spent three days consuming excessive amounts of alcohol and drugs including heroin, cocaine, amphetamine and ecstasy and became psychotic. Kay entered the victim's garage with a large kitchen knife and stabbed him 35 times in the face, chest and legs. The victim's wife and daughter witnessed part of the attack. At trial, the jury rejected Kay's case that he was dependent on drugs. The judge took a starting point of 25 years and increased it to reflect the aggravating features before taking mitigation into account. Kay was sentenced to life imprisonment with a minimum term of 23 years. Joyce was also diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. In the months before his offence, his condition deteriorated. After taking illegal drugs, he took a large knife from a shop and stabbed a customer to death with it. He then threatened to kill four other members of the public, cutting one of them with the knife. At trial, medical evidence established that even if the effects of intoxication were discounted, his abnormality of mind was sufficiently severe to substantially impair his responsibility for the killing. He was sentenced to life imprisonment with hospital and limitation directions under the [Mental Health Act 1983 s.45A](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3FE00610E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b42413438cf54af49d28beb490fc009f&contextData=(sc.Default)), and a minimum term of nine years' imprisonment.

Kay argued that there was tension between the decisions in _[R. v Stewart (James) [2009] EWCA Crim 593, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 2507, [2009] 3 WLUK 692](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA3EF741075AB11DEAE6FD5FC10F0F350/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b42413438cf54af49d28beb490fc009f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Attorney General's Reference (No.34 of 2014) [2014] EWCA Crim 1394, [2014] 2 Cr. App. R. (S.) 84, [2014] 7 WLUK 291](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7E84BEB006BA11E4BA31F64CCEFC0D02/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b42413438cf54af49d28beb490fc009f&contextData=(sc.Default))_. He also submitted that a person suffering from paranoid schizophrenia should not be debarred from relying on the partial defence of diminished responsibility on the basis of their voluntary intoxication.

## Held

Appeals dismissed, Kay's permission to appeal against sentence refused..

(1) **General principles** - There was no tension between the judgment in Stewart and the AG's Reference. Had there been, the court would have followed the former, which followed a long line of authority, whereas the AG's Reference was a sentencing case in which diminished responsibility had already been established, _[R. v Dietschmann (Anthony) [2003] UKHL 10, [2003] 1 A.C. 1209, [2003] 2 WLUK 908](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3FA4F150E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b42413438cf54af49d28beb490fc009f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Stewart followed, AG's Reference considered. The law did not debar someone suffering from schizophrenia from relying on the partial defence of diminished responsibility where voluntary intoxication had triggered the psychotic state, but he had to meet the criteria in the [Homicide Act 1957 s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7809FE30E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b42413438cf54af49d28beb490fc009f&contextData=(sc.Default)). He had to establish that his abnormality of mental functioning (in Kay's case a psychotic state) arose from a recognised medical condition that substantially impaired his responsibility. The recognised medical condition might be schizophrenia of such severity that, absent intoxication, it substantially impaired his responsibility; it might be schizophrenia coupled with drink/drugs dependence syndrome which together substantially impaired responsibility. However, if an abnormality of mental functioning arose from voluntary intoxication, and not from a recognised medical condition, an accused could not avail himself of the partial defence. That was for good reason: as a general rule, voluntary intoxication could not relieve an offender of responsibility for murder, save where it was relevant to the question of intent. The approach in Stewart, coupled with s.2(1), provided a clear and sensible approach for directing the jury (see paras [16, 19-20](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) **Kay's appeal against conviction** - There was no medical evidence that Kay's underlying illness was of such a degree that, independent of drug or alcohol abuse, it substantially impaired his responsibility. On the contrary, his condition was stable. Once the jury had rejected his assertion that he was suffering from dependency syndrome, he no longer had a defence. Stewart did not provide even a partial defence to everyone diagnosed with schizophrenia who, well aware of the possible consequences, chose to abuse drink or drugs and then killed, Stewart followed (paras [19-20](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) **Kay's appeal against sentence** - The jury had rejected the assertion that Kay was suffering from a relevant dependency syndrome in addition to schizophrenia. Parliament had decreed that where a knife was taken to the scene a starting point for the minimum term for murder was 25 years. There could be no complaint about that starting point where Kay had put himself in a psychotic state by voluntarily drinking and taking drugs, and arming himself with a knife. The brutality of the attack in the presence of the victim's family merited an uplift where the psychotic state arose from his conscious decision. The final figure after mitigation was not excessive. Leave to appeal against sentence was therefore refused (paras [27-29](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) **Joyce's appeal against sentence** - The judge had been entitled to find that Joyce retained a significant degree of responsibility for his offences. He knew of the impact illegal drugs had on his condition, but he chose to take them. There was no evidence of dependency. Further, Joyce had not only killed his victim but also caused terror to others who were threatened. The judge was obliged to reflect the overall offending in the sentence. A figure of 27 years before credit for guilty plea as the notional determinate sentence was severe, but not excessive. After deducting credit, the 18-year figure was halved to produce a minimum term of nine years before consideration could be given to release on parole (paras [52-56](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
