---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:21 am
---

# R v Bryce [2004] 2 Cr App R 35

B drove P to a caravan close to V’s home. B argued that he was not liable as an accessory to P’s subsequent murder of V because of a 12-hour delay between P’s arrival at the caravan and the murder, particularly as P had not fully made up his mind to kill when B drove him there.

Despite this, the Court of Appeal held that B’s act could amount to aiding.

There need be no causation in the sense that but for the assistance the crime would not have happened.

---

The appellant (B) appealed against a conviction for aiding and abetting a murder. B was part of a conspiracy to murder the deceased (M). His codefendant (G) masterminded a plan. B was instructed to drive X to M's house, so that X could shoot him with a gun. B maintained that he was uneasy at the plan and tried to delay things by offering an alternative plan. He suggested that he drive X to a caravan near M's house. The parties agreed. B took X to the caravan and left him. X was still uncertain about carrying out the killing. However, the next morning, X was contacted by another coaccused (Y) who relayed a message from G. Prompted by the message, X carried out the murder. X then went back to the caravan and placed the gun and cartridges under the mattress. Thereafter, B helped to dispose of the gun and cartridges used to commit the offence. He also assisted X and two others by allowing them to clean themselves up at his home after they had moved M's body and by destroying the tea towels which they had used to clean their hands. At the end of the prosecution case, B submitted that there was no case to answer. He submitted that an accessory could not be guilty if, at the time when he provided the assistance it was uncertain as to whether an offence was going to be committed by virtue of the fact that the principal offender had not formed his murderous intent. As he had rendered his service before X had decided to shoot M, he was no longer engaged as an accessory in the criminal purpose. B also argued that his acts were insufficient to amount to aiding and abetting because the prosecution had failed to prove what he had aided was in fact the commission of murder. The judge rejected both submissions. As to the first, he held that it was not necessary for the assisting party to have intended the murder before the commission of the crime, so long as it was proved that he foresaw the event as a real or substantial risk and nonetheless assisted. In respect of the second submission, the judge held that whether B actually assisted X was a question of fact for the jury. At the end of the trial, the judge gave the jury a thorough summing up. B was convicted of aiding and abetting and was sentenced to life imprisonment.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that (1) B had knowingly transported X with a concealed gun to a caravan close to where M lived and had arranged for X to stay there as a safe house in wait for an opportune moment to kill M. Although M was shot 13 hours later, that did not negative the causation between B's assistance and X shooting M. It did not matter that X had not fully made up his mind about shooting M. B's change to the original plan was no more than a different method adopted by agreement towards the same end. In addition, there was no intervening event that diverted or hindered the execution of that plan. Those facts led to the conclusion that B had assisted X. Accordingly, the judge had been entitled to reject the submission of no case to answer. (2) The liability of a secondary party was derived from that of the perpetrator. Only after proof that the perpetrator committed the substantive offence did the ingredients of secondary liability fall to be considered, including consideration of the separate mens rea required for secondary liability. To establish liability, all that was required was for the secondary party to have foreseen that there was a real possibility that an offence would be committed by the person whom he had assisted. In the instant case, given the facts of the case, the judge's directions on the point could not be faulted. (3) The judge had given no real guidance to the jury as to the considerations it should have in mind when considering whether or not the necessary causal link between B's assistance and the murder had been established. He had discussed the issue of causation broadly. That being so, the failure to specifically remind the jury of additional points in relation to the evidence was not fatal. In addition, the judge's directions to the jury in respect of the mens rea for aiding and abetting had also been sufficient in the circumstances.
