---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:17 am
---

# R v Meachen [2006] EWCA Crim 2414

## Summary

A judge had erred in ruling that consent was no defence either to a charge under the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 s.20 or a charge of indecent assault, absent the necessary mens rea for those offences, where the defendant's case was that the victim had consented to vigorous sexual activity involving the defendant inserting his fingers into her anus, and where very serious injury was caused as a result.

## Abstract

The appellant (M) appealed against his convictions for indecent assault, inflicting grievous bodily harm contrary to the [Offences Against the Person Act 1861 s.20](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0BF9A7E1E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default)) and inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent contrary to s.18 of the 1861 Act. M had pleaded guilty to the first two offences following the judge's ruling that, in view of the decision in R. v Emmett (Stephen Roy) Times, October 15, 1999 , consent could not be a defence where either actual bodily harm was caused or, adopting an objective test, what was done revealed a risk of more than transient or trivial injury. It had been the Crown's case that M had administered drugs to the victim, had anal intercourse with her and inserted a large object into her anus while she was unconscious, causing her very serious injuries. The defence case had been that the victim had consented to taking drugs with M, that M had, with the victim's consent, used his fingers to penetrate her anus and she had moved vigorously up and down on them. M contended that, in the absence of any acceptance by him that he intended some injury to the victim or foresaw the risk of injury, the judge could not have ruled that there was no defence in law to the s.20 offence or the indecent assault.

Held, allowing the appeal in part, that (1) the ingredients of the offence under s.20 must be proved by the prosecution, whether or not consent was in issue. As it was an ingredient of the offence that the harm was inflicted maliciously, it was necessary for the prosecution to show that the offender intended to cause some bodily harm or caused such harm recklessly, _[R. v Brown (Anthony Joseph) [1994] 1 A.C. 212, [1993] 3 WLUK 189](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DEA0F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Barnes (Mark) [2004] EWCA Crim 3246, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 910, [2004] 12 WLUK 620](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I330066A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[R. v Wilson (Alan Thomas) [1997] Q.B. 47, [1996] 2 WLUK 508](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74200050E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and Emmett distinguished. In Emmett the defendant had undoubtedly been aware of the serious risk of serious injury. On a charge of indecent assault, the prosecution had to prove that the touching of the victim was without consent. If the touching was with consent, then the fact that in the course of the consensual activity some bodily injury, even serious bodily injury, resulted accidentally, then as a matter of principle no criminality could attach, _[R. v Donovan (John George) [1934] 2 K.B. 498, [1934] 7 WLUK 52](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I423E87F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v Boyea (1992) 156 J.P. 505, [1992] 1 WLUK 763](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I84617F80E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Savage (Susan) [1992] 1 A.C. 699, [1991] 11 WLUK 88](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65112C60E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=00c766d55de54db7827b715cadab9746&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _R. v Slingsby (Simon) [1995] Crim. L.R. 570, [1995] 1 WLUK 225_ applied. Savage had been correctly decided in accordance with principle. The judge in the instant case had not been right to hold as a matter of law that consent was no defence either to the charge under s.20 or the charge of indecent assault, absent the necessary mens rea for those offences. The fact that serious injury had been caused, or was objectively likely, did not mean that there was no defence at the time the ruling was given, even though there was ample evidence on which the jury could have concluded that M had the necessary intention to cause injury. The convictions for indecent assault and inflicting grievous bodily harm were quashed. (2) The judge had clearly set out, in his summing-up, the issues for the jury on the count of causing grievous bodily harm with intent. The issues were: whether the injuries had been caused by the insertion of a large object into the victim's anus by M, or by the vigorous movements of the victim on M's fingers; whether M intended to inflict really serious bodily injury. There was no reason to doubt the safety of the conviction for inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent.
