---
aliases: 
tags: 
title: 'Duty to exercise reasonable care, skill and diligence'
date created: Tuesday, July 12th 2022, 10:14:58 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:07 am
---

# Duty to Exercise Reasonable Care, Skill and Diligence

> [!statute] s 174 - Duty to exercise reasonable care, skill and diligence
> (1) A director of a company must exercise reasonable care, skill and diligence.
> (2) This means the care, skill and diligence that would be exercised by a reasonably diligent person with-
> - (a) the general knowledge, skill and experience that may reasonably be expected of a person carrying out the functions carried out by the director in relation to the company, and
> - (b) the general knowledge, skill and experience that the director has.

## Interpretation

Codifies the common law duties of care and skill ([[Gregson v HAE Trustees Ltd [2008] EWHC 1006]]).

In early cases, the standard expected of directors was subjective, so poor directors could escape liability for company losses.

But [[Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC 562]] brought recognition of general duty of care and raised standard expected of directors to objective/ subjective test. This standard was borrowed on the [[Wrongful trading]] test used in s 214(4) IA 1986.

> [!test]
> The minimum standard expected of a director is that objectively expected of a director in that position, but then this can be subjectively raised if a particular director has special knowledge/ skill and experience. 

[[Re D’Jan of London Ltd [1994] 1 BCLC 561 ChD]]: director's actions will be measured against the conduct expected of a reasonably diligent person.

The standard applicable to director of a profitable company will change if it experiences financial difficulties ([[Roberts v Frohlich [2011] EWHC 257 (Ch)]]).

## Delegation

s 174 shares similarities with cases brought under Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986 in relation to delegation.

Principle: directors must be proactive in monitoring actions of delegates and other directors, and must keep themselves informed ([[Re Barings plc (No 5) [1999] 1 BCLC 433]]).

A director who is completely inactive will be in breach of this duty and may be held liable for wrongs committed by the company ([[Lexi Holdings plc (In Administration) v Luqman [2009] EWCA Civ 117]]—other directors responsible for not realising that one of them was stealing).

But directors able to legitimately defer to the views of a fellow director with greater experience when reasonable, and this did not breach the duty to exercise independent judgement: [[Madoff Securities International Ltd v Raven [2013] EWHC 3147]].

## Contract

There will usually also be a term in the director's service contract that they will perform their duties with reasonable skill and care. So a company can usually also seek damages for breach of contract.
