---
aliases: 
tags: 
title: Duty to avoid conflicts of interest
date created: Tuesday, July 12th 2022, 10:14:58 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:07 am
---

# Duty to Avoid Conflicts of Interest

> [!statute] s 175 - Duty to avoid conflicts of interest
> (1) A director of a company must avoid a situation in which he has, or can have, a direct or indirect interest that conflicts, or possibly may conflict, with the interests of the company.
> 
> (2) This applies in particular to the exploitation of any property, information or opportunity (and it is immaterial whether the company could take advantage of the property, information or opportunity).
> 
> (3) This duty does not apply to a conflict of interest arising in relation to a transaction or arrangement with the company.
> 
> (4) This duty is not infringed—
> - (a) if the situation cannot reasonably be regarded as likely to give rise to a conflict of interest; or
> - (b) if the matter has been authorised by the directors.
> 
> (5) Authorisation may be given by the directors—
> - (a) where the company is a private company and nothing in the company's constitution invalidates such authorisation, by the matter being proposed to and authorised by the directors; or
> - (b) where the company is a public company and its constitution includes provision enabling the directors to authorise the matter, by the matter being proposed to and authorised by them in accordance with the constitution.
> 
> (6) The authorisation is effective only if—
> - (a) any requirement as to the quorum at the meeting at which the matter is considered is met without counting the director in question or any other interested director, and
> - (b) the matter was agreed to without their voting or would have been agreed to if their votes had not been counted.
> 
> (7) Any reference in this section to a conflict of interest includes a conflict of interest and duty and a conflict of duties.

Note that the Explanatory Notes to s 175 comment that the duty under s 175(4) to (6) is not infringed if

1. The situation cannot reasonably be regarded as likely to give rise to a conflict
2. Authorisation (in private or public companies) has been given by independent directors (who have no direct or indirect interest).

## Interpretation

Reasonable man test for what constitutes conflict of interest: [[Boardman v Phipps [1967] 2 A.C. 46]]. Note that the point of this was to make law more chill, Boardman acknowledged as unfair.

s 175(3) expressly **excludes** conflicts of interest arising in relation to **transactions or arrangements** with the company; these are instead subject to disclosure duties in s 177. Practical rule: many directors will have interests in multiple companies.

### Corporate Opportunities

Corporate opportunity viewed as asset which may not be misappropriated by the directors:

- [[Cook v Deeks [1916] 1 AC 554 (Privy Council)]]
- [[Regal (Hastings) Ltd v Gulliver [1942] 1 All ER 378]]
- [[Bhullar v Bhullar [2003] EWCA Civ 424 (Court of Appeal)]]

It is irrelevant that the company could not/ would not have pursued that opportunity. If a director makes a personal profit out of their position, they are liable to account to the company for this. Principle expressly stated in s 175(2).

### Resigning Directors

A director cannot resign from a company just to then exploit a corporate opportunity, which would otherwise be a breach of s 175.

s 170(2)(a):

>“a person who ceases to be a director continues to be subject (a) to the duty in section 175 (duty to avoid conflicts of interest) as regards the exploitation of any property, information or opportunity of which he became aware when he was a director.”

But need to consider all the facts to ascertain whether s 175 has been breached or not:

- [[Shepherds Investments Ltd v Walters [2006] EWHC 836]]
- [[CMS Dolphin Ltd v Simonet [2001] EWHC 415]]
- See also [[Foster Bryant Surveying v Bryant [2007] EWCA Civ 200]], but note this is a pre-CA 2006 case and questionable whether it would be decided the same way today.

In [[Towers v Premier Waste Management Ltd [2012] BCC, 72]], a director borrowed equipment from one of the company's customers for his personal interest without disclosing his personal interest to the board. Found to have breached s 175 despite no bad faith, no actual conflict and no quantifiable loss to the company. Director ordered to pay rental costs to the company.

### Competing Directorships

A general equitable rule prevents a fiduciary from entering into a position which gives rise to conflicting fiduciary duties to another person without the informed consent of both principals ([[Clark Boyce v Mouat [1994] 1 AC 428]]). Company will need to authorise the conflict under the process in s 175(5) and 175(6).

But depends on facts of the case: in [[In Plus Group Ltd v Pyke [2002] EWCA Civ 370 (Court of Appeal)]] no breach was fiduciary duty was found.

## Consequences

If a director breaches this duty, they will be obliged to account for any profit made unless authorised by the company.
