#key-case 

This case concerned the government's derogation, under Article 15 ECHR, from the right to personal liberty under Article 5(1) ECHR. It was argued that this derogation was necessary so that the government could initiate a policy of indefinite detention of foreign nationals suspected of being terrorists (who could not be forcibly removed from the UK).

This policy was a key element of the Home Office's response to the threat of terrorism in the UK, following '9/11'. It led to a number of suspected 'international terrorists' being detained without trial in Belmarsh Prison for up to three years.

In accordance with Article 15, the Home Office therefore had to show both that there was a “public emergency threatening the life of the nation” and that the measures taken were “strictly required”; in other words, that they represented a proportionate response to the aim behind the anti-terrorism policy.

The House of Lords found as follows:

The decision whether a “public emergency” exists, within the meaning of Article 15, is largely a political decision, and the court should “give great weight” to the higher competence of the government to assess this factor. (Note, however, a bold dissenting opinion on this point from Lord Hoffmann.) However, even if it was accepted that there was a public emergency, the measures only targeted people who were non-UK nationals. This was not deemed to be a proportionate and rational response, given that the contemporary threat was equally evident from UK nationals. The measures were also unjustifiably discriminatory (in relation to Article 14).

Note the rule of law themes in this case relating to equality before the law and non-discrimination, reflected by Lord Bingham (at para 67):

> “What has to be justified is not the measure in issue, but the difference in treatment between one person or group and another. What cannot be justified here is the decision to detain one group of suspected international terrorists, defined by nationality or immigration status, and not another.”

---

### Summary

It was declared under the Human Rights Act 1998 s.4 that the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 s.23 was incompatible with the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.5 and Art.14 in so far as it was disproportionate and permitted detention of suspected international terrorists in a way that discriminated on the ground of nationality or immigration status, and the Human Rights Act 1998 (Designated Derogation) Order 2001 was quashed.

### Abstract

The appellants (X) appealed against a decision of the Court of Appeal ([2002] EWCA Civ 1502, [2004] Q.B. 335) that their detention under the [Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 s.23](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0DDDB4B0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4a31155dd4344a49c889eb273e612b9&contextData=(sc.Default)) on the ground that they posed a risk to national security did not breach the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4a31155dd4344a49c889eb273e612b9&contextData=(sc.Default)). X were all foreign nationals who had been certified by the Secretary of State as suspected international terrorists under s.21 of the 2001 Act. They could not be deported since that would in the circumstances have involved a breach of the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4a31155dd4344a49c889eb273e612b9&contextData=(sc.Default)). They had been detained under s.23 of the 2001 Act without charge or trial in accordance with the derogation from Art.5(1)(f) of Sch.1 Part I of the 1998 Act permitted by the [Human Rights Act 1998 Order 2001](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4a31155dd4344a49c889eb273e612b9&contextData=(sc.Default)). That Order had been enacted to deal with the perceived terrorist threat from Al-Qaeda after the terrorist attacks in the US on September 11, 2001. The Special Immigration Appeal Commission (the Commission), whose decision was reversed by the Court of Appeal, had found that s.23 of the 2001 Act was incompatible with Art.5 and Art.14 of Sch.1 Part I of the 1998 Act insofar as it allowed the detention of suspected international terrorists in a way that discriminated against them by reason of their nationality. 

X argued that 

(1) the derogation from the provisions of the Convention under Art.15 was impermissible because there was no "public emergency threatening the life of the nation" within the meaning of Art.15(1) so that the threshold test for reliance on Art.15 had not been satisfied; 
(2) the derogation was not proportionate because the legislative objective could have been achieved by means which did not, or did not so severely, restrict the fundamental right to personal freedom; 
(3) s.23 was discriminatory in providing for the detention of suspected international terrorists who were not UK nationals but not for the detention of suspected international terrorists who were UK nationals.

Held, allowing the appeal (Lord Hoffmann dissenting on the public emergency issue and Lord Walker dissenting on the proportionality and discrimination issues), that 

(1) it had not been shown that the Commission had misdirected itself in law on the issue whether there was an emergency, and its decision was open to it on the evidence. Great weight should be given to the judgment of the Government and Parliament on that issue, because they were called on to exercise a pre- eminently political judgment. The Government had been entitled to conclude that there was a public emergency. 

(2) X were entitled to invite the courts to review, on proportionality grounds, the 2001 Order and the compatibility with the Convention of s.23, and the courts were not effectively precluded by any doctrine of deference from scrutinising the issues raised. The Commission's reasons did not warrant its conclusion that the derogation was proportionate. Sections 21 and 23 were disproportionate because they did not rationally address the threat to the security of the UK presented by Al-Qaeda terrorists and their supporters since 
(a) they did not address the threat presented by UK nationals, 
(b) they permitted foreign nationals suspected of being Al-Qaeda terrorists or their supporters to pursue their activities abroad if there was any country to which they were able to go, and 
(c) the sections permitted the certification and detention of persons who were not suspected of presenting any threat to the security of the UK as Al-Qaeda terrorists or supporters. If the threat presented to the security of the UK by UK nationals suspected of being Al-Qaeda terrorists or their supporters could be addressed without infringing their right to personal liberty, it was not shown why similar measures could not adequately address the threat presented by foreign nationals. The measures were not "strictly required" by the exigencies of the situation within Art.15. 

(3) The prohibition on discrimination on grounds of nationality or immigration status under Art.14 had not been the subject of derogation. The decision to detain one group of suspected international terrorists, defined by nationality or immigration status, and not another could not be justified and violated Art.14. It was also a violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Art.26 and so inconsistent with the UK's other obligations under international law within the meaning of Art.15 of the Convention. Because of those obligations, the UK could not rely on the old rule that a sovereign state could control the entry of aliens into its territory and their expulsion from it. The 2001 Order was quashed and it was declared under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B265520E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4a31155dd4344a49c889eb273e612b9&contextData=(sc.Default)) that s.23 of the 2001 Act was incompatible with Art.5 and Art.14 of Sch.1 Part I of the 1998 Act in so far as it was disproportionate and permitted the detention of suspected international terrorists in a way that discriminated on the ground of nationality or immigration status.