### Summary

In a case concerning rival applications for a licence to undertake a commercial venture, fairness required that the applicant be told of the decision-maker's concerns about one's own case, and that each applicant be treated alike. Fairness did not require a right to know the details of the rival's case.

### Abstract

The appellant (M) appealed against the dismissal of its application for judicial review of the decision of the respondent authority not to offer an underground coal mining licence and demise of coal to M.

M was one of two companies that had applied for the licence and demise in respect of a site in Wales. The authority had considered both applications in the exercise of its functions under the [Coal Industry Act 1994](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FD23190E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=faf0ee0de2784cdfa3dd38a9d38df50b&contextData=(sc.Search)), but decided to offer the licence and demise to the other company (X). M applied for a review but, following a hearing, the authority confirmed its previous decision.

M argued that it was a basic imperative of the need of fairness that a party who would be affected by a public decision was entitled to know the case against him, and accordingly that (1) the authority's procedures should have required the details of X's rival application to be disclosed to M, and that such disclosure should have been given; (2) the authority had failed to give M fair notice of their concerns about the previous mining ventures of M's chairman and had failed to question him on the contents of a document that contained allegations about failures or cessation of working at four collieries with which he had been associated.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) What fairness demanded varied accordingly to the context, _[Lloyd v McMahon [1987] A.C. 625, [1987] 3 WLUK 132](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE1F70251E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=faf0ee0de2784cdfa3dd38a9d38df50b&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied. In deciding whether the authority should have adopted procedures that would have required disclosure of X's application, the distinction between the two stages of the evaluation process identified in _[R. (on the application of Agnello) v Hounslow LBC [2003] EWHC 3112 (Admin), [2004] B.L.G.R. 536, [2003] 12 WLUK 455](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74E7E430E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=faf0ee0de2784cdfa3dd38a9d38df50b&contextData=(sc.Search))_ was very unlikely to be a distinction of use in the context of a public body's duty of fairness, Agnello considered. That two stage process could not serve as a statement of principle. In a case such as the instant, which concerned rival applications for a licence to undertake a commercial venture, a distinction had to be drawn between a right to know the details of the rival's case, and a right to know the decision-maker's concerns about one's own case. Fairness required that the applicant be told of the latter, and that each applicant be treated alike. The authority was concerned to arrive at a result in the public interest in conformity with the obligations laid on it by the 1994 Act. In the execution of that process no applicant was shown the details of any other applicant's bid, so they were both treated equally. If every applicant saw every other's bid, and was entitled to comment and challenge and criticize, there would be a resulting prolongation and complexity of the decision-making process. Accordingly, fairness did not require the details of X's application to be disclosed to M. 

(2) If the allegations contained in the document were to have any real effect on the decision, fairness required that M should have been questioned about them. However, the issues about the previous mining ventures of M's chairman did not have a material effect on the outcome of the application. The whole focus of the decision was on the rival proposals for the site in issue, and the other ventures did not relate to that site. The authority would have granted M's application had it not been for X, which tended to negate any real concerns about the previous ventures of M's chairman.