### Summary

Where the justification for the making of a non-derogating control order lay wholly within closed material that could not be disclosed to the controlled person, the [Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 Sch.1 para.4(3)(d)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7D65C110E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)) had to be read and given effect "except where to do so would be incompatible with the right of the controlled person to a fair trial".

### Abstract

In conjoined appeals the appellants (M and F) appealed against decisions (_[[2007] EWHC 651, Times, April 18, 2007](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDD287430E96B11DBB292CB0B082AD93F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[[2006] EWCA Civ 1140, [2007] Q.B. 415](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8A7FA7A0237111DBA1BE83A3E64D3789/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the procedures contained in the [Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I99B8A5F0E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)) were not incompatible with the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)). The respondent secretary of state cross-appealed against a decision that the obligations contained in a non-derogating control order imposed on F amounted to a deprivation of his liberty.

Non-derogating control orders had been imposed on both M and F. In both cases the secretary of state's application had been supported by open and closed statements. In M's case, the open statement asserted that he was an Islamist extremist who intended to travel to Iraq to fight against coalition forces. The basis for those assertions was contained in the closed material. The open case against F was simply that he had links with Islamist extremists. The control order to which F was subject imposed on him, among other things, a 14-hour curfew and the requirement that he wear an electronic tag. The issues for determination were (i) whether the impact of the obligations imposed on F amounted to a deprivation of his liberty within the meaning of [Art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Convention; (ii) if it did, whether it was a proper exercise of the court's discretion under [s.3(12)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I99B8A5F0E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act to order that the control order be quashed as a whole and ab initio rather than to quash individual obligations or direct the secretary of state to modify individual obligations; (iii) whether a non-derogating control order constituted a criminal charge for the purposes of Art.6; (iv) whether the procedures provided for by s.3 of the Act and [CPR Pt 76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1234FCB1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)) were compatible with Art.6 in circumstances where they resulted in the cases being made against M and F being in their essence entirely undisclosed to them, with no specific allegation of terrorism-related activity contained in open material.

### Held

Judgment accordingly.

(Lord Hoffman dissenting on the issue of whether the procedures provided for by s.3 of the Act and Part 76 of the CPR were compatible with Art.6 of the Convention) (1) The effect of the control order was not such as to deprive F of his liberty, _[Secretary of State for the Home Department v JJ [2007] UKHL 45, [2008] 1 A.C. 385, [2007] 10 WLUK 805](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I57CF5E30883E11DC8800837DEB8FB89A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Secretary of State for the Home Department v E [2007] UKHL 47, [2008] 1 A.C. 499, [2007] 10 WLUK 803](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I58E19180883E11DC8800837DEB8FB89A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. (2) In the light of the conclusion on the first issue, the second issue did not arise. Had it done so, the judge's decision to quash the control order would have been upheld for the reasons given in JJ. (3) Non-derogating control order proceedings did not involve the determination of a criminal charge: there was no assertion of criminal conduct, only a foundation of suspicion; no identification of any specific criminal offence was provided for; the order was preventative rather than punitive or retributive in purpose; and the obligations imposed had to be no more restrictive than was judged necessary to achieve the preventative object of the order, _[A v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 1502, [2004] Q.B. 335, [2002] 10 WLUK 719](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I46E6CFC0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. However, in any case in which a person was at risk of an order containing obligations of the stringency found in F's case, the application of the civil limb of Art.6(1) entitled him to such measure of procedural protection as was commensurate with the gravity of the potential consequences, _[Engel v Netherlands (A/22) (1979-80) 1 E.H.R.R. 647, [1976] 6 WLUK 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA1889030E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and _[R. (on the application of McCann) v Manchester Crown Court [2002] UKHL 39, [2003] 1 A.C. 787, [2002] 10 WLUK 472](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7A58B6B0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. (4) Although Strasbourg had not dealt with a case exactly on all fours, a number of principles could be derived from the authorities. Even in criminal proceedings there were competing interests; evidence could only be withheld if strictly necessary; any difficulties caused to the defence had to be sufficiently counterbalanced by the measures taken by the court; what was sufficient was specific to each case; there was a difference between background information not essential to the outcome of the defence and evidence which was crucial to its determination; and in none of the Strasbourg cases did the court have the assistance of a special advocate. Whilst the court was not confident that Strasbourg would hold that every control order hearing in which the special advocate procedure was used would be sufficient to comply with Art.6, with strenuous effort it should usually be possible to accord the controlled person a substantial measure of procedural justice. The best judge of whether the proceedings afforded a sufficient measure of procedural protection was the judge who conducted the hearing. If, despite all efforts, it was not possible to afford sufficient protection, Convention rights required that the judge be in a position to quash the order. However, that would not be so in every case. In the instant case it was not appropriate to make a declaration of incompatibility. Rather, [Sch.1 para.4(3)(d)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7D65C110E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=60cce7ba2d1541d98be5dc16c8a83ea7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act had to be read and be given effect "except where to do so would be incompatible with the right of the controlled person to a fair trial". The cases of both M and F were to be remitted for consideration in the light of the Appellate Committee's conclusions. (Per Lord Hoffman) The special advocate procedure provided sufficient safeguards to satisfy Art.6.