 It was held that the Hong Kong government had to honour the terms of its original policy to allow Chinese nationals, who were the subject of repatriation to China, to put forward a case to remain in Hong Kong.

---

 Where a public authority has promised to follow a certain procedure before reaching a certain decision, good administration requires that it should act fairly and implement its promises, so long as that does not interfere with its statutory duty. N entered Hong Kong illegally from Macao. Then the government announced a new policy of repatriating illegal immigrants. On fears being expressed by Chinese people who had entered through Macao about repatriation to China and petitioning the governor, the government announced that each illegal entrant from Macao would be interviewed and his case treated on its merits. N was detained and questioned and a removal order was made against him. He was not given the opportunity to make representations. The High Court refused an order of prohibition. The Court of Appeal granted the order until N had been given an opportunity to be heard.

Held, dismissing the Attorney General's appeal, that where a public authority had promised to follow a certain procedure before reaching a certain decision, good administration required that it should act fairly and implement its promise, as long as that did not interfere with its statutory duty. The promise to interview each application and consider each case on its merits required each applicant to be given an opportunity to state his case ( _[R. v Liverpool Corp Ex p. Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators Association [1972] 2 Q.B. 299, [1972] 2 WLUK 61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I55DB4870E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=887f6fe68d4f4616b88912eb4c98d41e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; dictum of Barwick C.J. in _Salemi v Mackellar (No.2) 137 C.L.R. 396_ , disapproved).