The essence of "consultation" is the communication of a genuine invitation to give advice, and the mere sending of a letter which is not received is not sufficient. The Mushroom Growers Association was an organisation which the Minister was bound to consult under the [Industrial Training Act 1964 s.1(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I979C44B0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=18d880ff7c6d4d5d939d8407c3376f9d&contextData=(sc.Search)) before making the order which established the Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training Board. Press notices and a draft schedule were sent to a number of addresses including the National Farmers Union and the Mushroom Growers Association. No comment was received from the Association and the order came into operation on August 5, 1966. It later appeared that the Association had never received the communication.

Held, that there had been no consultation, merely an attempt to consult, and the order had no application to persons engaged in the growing of mushrooms. (_[Rollo v Minister of Town and Country Planning [1947] 2 All E.R. 488, [1947] 7 WLUK 103](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I98329670E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=18d880ff7c6d4d5d939d8407c3376f9d&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied).

---

The Minister of Labour consulted a national union for his plan to set up a training board under the Industrial Training Act 1964. The schedule defining the industry was circulated, and a press notice was published. The order constituting the board was made. An association, which was a branch of the union, did not receive a draft schedule and had no knowledge of the press notice. It claimed that it was not bound by the order. 

The Queen's Bench Division, allowing the claim, held that the words 'any organisation' in s 1(4) of the Act meant that the Minister was under a duty to consult 'every' organisation which appeared to him to be an organisation under that section. In the instant case, the mere sending of a letter was only an attempt to consult. Also, the general rule that consultation with a parent body would constitute consultation with the constituent parts did not apply as the Minister attempted and intended direct consultation with the association and the union.