### Summary

In litigation to determine the UK's obligations to investigate allegations of unlawful killing and ill-treatment of civilians by British soldiers in Iraq between 2003 and 2009, the court considered the remit of the Iraq Historic Allegations Team, including whether new claims recently notified were time-barred, and whether refusals by the secretary of state to perform an inquiry in certain cases were justified.

### Abstract

The court was required to determine further issues in proceedings to discern the extent of the UK's obligations to investigate allegations of unlawful killing and ill-treatment of civilians by British soldiers in Iraq between 2003 and 2009.

Issues for determination were:

(1) four applications for judicial review where the secretary of state, in reliance upon information from the Iraq Historic Allegations Team (the Team), had decided not to perform an "inquisitorial" inquiry into four alleged incidences of unlawful killing;

(2) whether to grant permission for a fifth such application to proceed;

(3) whether claims notified to the Team in October 2014 and March 2015 were barred because of delay;

(4) the extent to which the Team was required to investigate allegations of criminal conduct.

### Held

Judgment accordingly.

(1) In **Hassan** and **Al-Rikabi**, an inquiry had been refused because of a pending appeal by the secretary of state against a finding that the deaths occurred "within the [UK's] jurisdiction" for the purposes of [ECHR art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID974C9D83A194A90B735FDDC6203A5AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)). In both cases there was a reasonable evidence-based suspicion that force had been used which was not justified under [art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)). Absent contrary evidence, the criteria for establishing an inquisitorial inquiry were met. The secretary of state's refusal was unlawful under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)). If an inquiry were ordered straightaway and the jurisdiction appeal were subsequently allowed, costs would have been incurred which there was no legal obligation to incur. However, there was significantly less risk of injustice in making the order than in withholding the remedy until after the jurisdiction appeal. The applications for judicial review in those two cases were granted (see paras [30, 34-35, 38, 41-45](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). In **Owaid** and **Muhyi** the refusal to establish an inquiry was justified. In **Owaid** the refusal was based on a lack of credible evidence that the fatal shot had been fired by a UK forces member. The deceased had been killed during a public demonstration in August 2003, after the Iraq war had ended, but when the UK was exercising public powers. British forces did not, then, owe operational duties of the kind in _[Osman v United Kingdom (23452/94) [1999] 1 F.L.R. 193, [1998] 10 WLUK 513](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I14AEDD80E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_, but they owed a form of "operational" duty to safeguard civilians' lives, Osman referred to and _[Makaratzis v Greece (50385/99) (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 49, [2004] 12 WLUK 603](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IED4B6650E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Maintaining civil order during a riot was covered by art.2, so there was a credible allegation sufficient to trigger the duty to investigate. That duty automatically arose where, during gunfire between soldiers and insurgents, it was unclear who had fired the fatal shot. It was a breach of the requirement to investigate promptly that no investigation had been performed before the Team's 2014 examination. However, that investigation had discharged the investigatory duty (paras [65-66, 75-77, 86-88, 95-96, 101, 105-107, 109, 116](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). In **Muhyi**, the refusal was based on the absence of criminal negligence by a member of the armed forces. A boy had been killed in an explosion. His father had produced conflicting evidence about its cause. His legal team had failed to establish the true position, and had misled the court in obtaining permission to proceed with the claim (118-119, 129-131).

(2) There were no grounds for granting permission to apply for judicial review to **Memmon Salam** **Al-Maliki** (paras [138, 140-147, 150](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) A duty to investigate arose when an arguable breach of art.2 or [art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)) had "come to the attention" of a state agent, that being someone who would reasonably be expected to act on it in an investigatory manner. The duty lasted for as long as the authorities could reasonably be expected take measures to establish what had happened and who was responsible. If the duty ceased, a new duty could arise if fresh information materialised. An allegation first made a long time after the death or ill-treatment would not be outside the time limits in [s.7(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act and [CPR r.54.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I118B0110E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)) if it was of a type to trigger a duty to investigate. However, a decision to investigate by the Team or the secretary of state did not impose on the state an investigative duty under arts 2 or 3 which would otherwise not exist, _[Brecknell v United Kingdom (32457/04) (2008) 46 E.H.R.R. 42, [2007] 11 WLUK 675](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC553D860A55211DCA8E9CBAE832EBB63/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Silih v Slovenia (71463/01) (2009) 49 E.H.R.R. 37, [2009] 4 WLUK 274](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I967874B0B93711DE9D75CCA7968CE3E6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[McCaughey v United Kingdom (43098/09) (2014) 58 E.H.R.R. 13, [2013] 7 WLUK 493](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C0B34C02CC411E39649B4F77F98EB6B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Where complainants had had the information for a long time but not provided it to the authorities until much later, [ECHR art.35](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA57213D7B75945089B219E368ACEE5BD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)) became relevant, together with the test in _[Varnava v Turkey (16064/90) (2010) 50 E.H.R.R. 21, [2008] 1 WLUK 65](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE047E9C016C211DF970C9D47B1B6D882/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_, as reviewed in _[Mocanu v Romania (10865/09) (2015) 60 E.H.R.R. 19, [2014] 9 WLUK 413](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I05B7C120CD9411E4B0C3859E0D2BAB5E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_. Whether a want of diligence would result in the court using the art.35 approach to reject an application as out of time depended on the circumstances and whether there was an acceptable explanation for the delay. Undue delay should result in a refusal of relief, _[R. (on the application of Keyu) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2015] UKSC 69, [2016] A.C. 1355, [2015] 11 WLUK 613](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF402D1A0938F11E5AFE8EA94D2ADFFA8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Varnava and Mocanu considered. Even where delay did not bar a claim, the passage of time remained relevant to the credibility of the allegation and the extent to which an investigation was possible or worthwhile (paras [153-167, 175-184, 192-203](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). There was no duty to investigate the **Dallas** claim (paras [205-222](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")) or the **Abdullah** claim (paras [223-228](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The court considered whether the investigative duties under arts 2 and 3 were different (paras [229-241](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")) before concluding that the claim of **Mohsen Lafta Al-Maliki** was time-barred (paras [242-250](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")) and that **Al-Seeran's** was not (paras [251-255](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) The court considered the Team's remit. The test as to whether and how far it should investigate allegations was the "evidential sufficiency test", namely whether there was a realistic prospect of conviction. Where the Team decided that the test was not met, it had no duty under the [Armed Forces Act 2006](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I87BB26F07CF611DB8CB9C33D1B0B4462/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4141732ea7454a05a853ea300066f919&contextData=(sc.Default)) or at common law to investigate further (paras [256-283](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The Team could, in some circumstances, properly decline to investigate historic allegations of killing or ill-treatment (paras [288-291](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).