### Summary

The Supreme Court applied and explained the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in _[Paposhvili v Belgium (41738/10) [2017] Imm. A.R. 867, [2016] 12 WLUK 304](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID29307C09A0311E79308E1B0023CD4C4/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ceefab5ed22c4e6795e66684a052462d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ as to the effect of [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ceefab5ed22c4e6795e66684a052462d&contextData=(sc.Default)) in deportation cases where it was claimed that an absence of appropriate medical treatment in the receiving country would result in a breach of the deportee's rights.

### Abstract

A Zimbabwean national receiving treatment for HIV in the UK appealed against a decision that his deportation would not breach his rights under [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ceefab5ed22c4e6795e66684a052462d&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The secretary of state wished to deport the appellant after he had been convicted of serious crimes. The appellant's condition was controlled by anti-retroviral treatment he received in the UK. Anti-retrovirals would be available to him in Zimbabwe, but the one he received in the UK would not be. Before the Court of Appeal, the appellant had accepted that his claim did not satisfy the strict approach to ill health claims under art.3 set out in the binding authority of _[N v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31, [2005] 2 A.C. 296, [2005] 5 WLUK 82](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0A0B2BE0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ceefab5ed22c4e6795e66684a052462d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and that his appeal would be dismissed. However, he stated his intention to appeal to the Supreme Court on the basis that the later European Court of Human Rights decision in _[Paposhvili v Belgium (41738/10) [2017] Imm. A.R. 867, [2016] 12 WLUK 304](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID29307C09A0311E79308E1B0023CD4C4/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ceefab5ed22c4e6795e66684a052462d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ relaxed the test for finding a violation of art.3 in such cases. The Court of Appeal duly dismissed the appeal and also offered an interpretation of Paposhvili.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

**Paposhvili -** The ECtHR in Paposhvili had stated that cases raising an issue under art.3 included "situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds have been shown for believing that he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy". That new criterion meant that, in cases of resistance to return by reference to ill health, art.3 might extend to a situation other than those in which there was an imminent risk of death in the returning state. Its new focus on the existence and accessibility of appropriate treatment in the receiving state had led the ECtHR to make significant pronouncements about the procedural requirements of art.3 in that regard (see paras [22-23](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Effect of Paposhvili -** The Court of Appeal had considered that Paposhvili reflected only a modest extension of the protection against return given by art.3 in ill health cases. It had stated that the ECtHR in Paposhvili had regarded the decision on art.3 in _[N v United Kingdom (26565/05) (2008) 47 E.H.R.R. 39, [2008] 5 WLUK 632](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA2DBCF60345211DD8B7D9E7E5A0AD1BD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ceefab5ed22c4e6795e66684a052462d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ as rightly decided, but the ECtHR had made no express agreement with that decision, and the application of the new criterion to the facts of N v United Kingdom would suggest a violation, N v United Kingdom doubted. The Court of Appeal had interpreted the new criterion's requirement of "a significant reduction in life expectancy" as "imminence of death". That was too much of a leap. However, "significant", in the context of the new criterion, had to mean "substantial". Were a reduction in life expectancy to be less than substantial, it would not attain the minimum level of severity which art.3 required (paras [27-31](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Procedural requirements -** The basic principle was that it was for the person alleging a breach of rights to establish it. However, the ECtHR had modified that principle in art.3 ill health cases. The threshold was for the applicant to adduce evidence "capable of demonstrating that there are substantial grounds for believing" that art.3 would be violated. That was a demanding threshold for an applicant to cross: the evidence adduced by the applicant had to demonstrate "substantial" grounds for believing that it was a "very exceptional" case because of a "real" risk of subjection to "inhuman" treatment. It was an obligation to raise a prima facie case of potential infringement of art.3. If an applicant presented evidence to that standard, the returning state could seek to counter it in the manner outlined in Paposhvili. The reasonable premise behind that guidance was that, while it was for the applicant to adduce evidence about their medical condition and treatment, the state was better able to collect evidence about the availability and accessibility of suitable treatment in the receiving state (paras [32-33](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Disposal -** The instant court would apply the ECtHR's decision as to the effect of art.3 and depart from the decision in N v Secretary of State, Paposhvili applied, N v Secretary of State superseded. The appeal would be allowed and the matter remitted to the Upper Tribunal to be heard with up-to-date evidence directed to Paposhvili's substantive and procedural requirements (paras [34, 37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).