The applicant non-governmental organisation (X) complained that a ban on paid political advertising on broadcast media imposed by the respondent state, the United Kingdom, in the [Communications Act 2003 s.321(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA1737300E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7097e9ae1523424091b7f4fb694c531c&contextData=(sc.Search)) breached its rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE7756732A7B4BBC93274BDE4496FB0F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7097e9ae1523424091b7f4fb694c531c&contextData=(sc.Search)).

X campaigned against the use of animals in commerce, science and leisure. It had wished to broadcast a television advertisement, but the UK's relevant authority refused to clear it for broadcast as X's objectives were "wholly or mainly of a political nature" within s.321(2). The advertisement could be viewed on the internet. The domestic courts (_[R. (on the application of Animal Defenders International) v Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport [2008] UKHL 15, [2008] 1 A.C. 1312, [2008] 3 WLUK 244](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF99845A0F0C211DC810BBB39FEDB30E7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7097e9ae1523424091b7f4fb694c531c&contextData=(sc.Search))_) rejected X's argument that the prohibition breached its art.10 rights. It was agreed that the prohibition was an interference with art.10 rights but that it pursued the legitimate aim of preserving the impartiality of broadcasting and thereby protecting the democratic process. The issue was the measure's proportionality.

X argued that the prohibition was outside the narrow margin of appreciation afforded to the UK; the prohibition was illogical since it was limited to broadcast media while there was no prohibition on newer media; the provision of free party political broadcasts was irrelevant to the question of proportionality; and the prohibition could have been narrowed by allowing advertising by social advocacy groups outside electoral periods.

### Held

Complaint dismissed.

(Judges Ziemele, Sajo, Kalaydjiyeva, Vucininc, de Gaetano, Tulkens, Spielmann and Laffranque dissenting) The margin of appreciation was defined by the type of expression at issue; there was little scope under [art.10(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE7756732A7B4BBC93274BDE4496FB0F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7097e9ae1523424091b7f4fb694c531c&contextData=(sc.Search)) for restrictions on debates on questions of public interest, including the protection of animals. The margin was narrowed by the strong interest of a democratic society in the press exercising its role as public watchdog. The Court scrupulously examined the proportionality of restrictions of expression by the press in television programmes on subjects of general interest. When an NGO drew attention to matters of public interest, it exercised a public watchdog role similar to that of the press. The margin of appreciation was therefore narrow. The prohibition had been the culmination of an exceptional examination by parliamentary bodies, having been reported on and commented on by specialist bodies, and having been enacted with cross-party support. All bodies had found the prohibition to have been a necessary interference with art.10 rights. That explained the degree of deference shown by the domestic courts to Parliament's decision to adopt the prohibition. The prohibition's proportionality had nonetheless been debated in some detail in the courts; they had carefully applied the relevant Convention case law to the prohibition. The Court attached considerable weight to the reviews by parliamentary and judicial bodies and to their view that the general measure had been necessary. The prohibition had specifically been circumscribed to address the precise risk of distortion the state sought to avoid with the minimum impairment of the right of expression. A range of alternative media were available to X. A distinction based on the particular influence of the broadcast media was coherent; the choices inherent in the use of the internet and social media meant that the information therefrom did not have the same impact as broadcast information. Broadcast advertisements had an advantage for which advertisers would pay large sums of money, far beyond the reach of most NGOs who wished to participate in public debate. Relaxing the prohibition by providing free party political broadcasts was a relevant factor in the review of the overall balance achieved by the general measure. The UK authorities had been entitled to be concerned that narrowing the scope of the prohibition by allowing advertising outside electoral periods risked abuse and arbitrariness. There was no European consensus on how to regulate paid political broadcasting: that could favour allowing a wider margin of appreciation than normally afforded to restrictions on matters of public interest. The impact of the prohibition did not outweigh the convincing justifications for the measure. There had therefore been no violation of art.10 (see paras 102-104, 114-125 of judgment).