### Summary

The UK authorities had not acted in breach of their obligation under [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=79ca0b9cfd0a464bb0e8e66f3289b20d&contextData=(sc.Default)) to conduct an effective investigation into the fatal shooting by police officers of a man who had been mistakenly identified as a suicide bomber.

### Abstract

The applicant complained that the decision of the UK authorities not to prosecute any individuals following the fatal shooting of her cousin (M) by police officers was in breach of the authorities' duty under [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=79ca0b9cfd0a464bb0e8e66f3289b20d&contextData=(sc.Default)) to conduct an effective investigation into his death.

On 7 July 2005, four suicide bombers detonated bombs on the London transport network, killing themselves and 52 other people. On 21 July 2005, explosive devices were discovered in rucksacks left on three underground trains and on one bus. On 22 July 2005, the police conducted a surveillance operation at an address at which two suspects in the failed bombings of 21 July were thought to live. M lived close to that address and was wrongly identified as one of the suspects. He was followed to an underground station and shot dead by armed officers while on board a stationary train. In 2007, the Office of the Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis was found guilty of breaches of the [Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I47E311A0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=79ca0b9cfd0a464bb0e8e66f3289b20d&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.33](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I485E5C20E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=79ca0b9cfd0a464bb0e8e66f3289b20d&contextData=(sc.Default)) in connection with M's death. However, no individual police officers were prosecuted.

### Held

Complaint dismissed.

There had been no breach of the duty under art.2 to conduct an effective investigation into M's death. As soon as it was confirmed that M had not been involved in the attempted attack on 21 July 2005, the Metropolitan Police Service publicly accepted that he had been killed in error by special firearms officers. A representative of the Metropolitan Police Service flew to Brazil to apologise to his family face to face and to make an ex gratia payment to cover their financial needs. They were further advised to seek independent legal advice and assured that any legal costs would be met by the Metropolitan Police Service. The individual responsibility of the police officers involved and the institutional responsibility of the Office of the Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis were subsequently considered in depth by the Independent Police Complaints Commission, the CPS, the criminal court and the coroner and jury during the relevant inquest. Later, when M's family brought a civil claim for damages, the Metropolitan Police Service agreed to a settlement with an undisclosed sum being paid in compensation. The decision not to prosecute any individual officer was not due to any failings in the investigation or the state's tolerance of or collusion in unlawful acts; rather, it was due to the fact that, following a thorough investigation, a prosecutor considered all the facts of the case and concluded that there was insufficient evidence against any individual officer to meet the threshold evidential test in respect of any criminal offence. Nevertheless, institutional and operational failings were identified, and detailed recommendations were made to ensure that the mistakes leading to M's death were not repeated. Those institutional failures resulted in the conviction of the Office of the Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis for offences under the 1974 Act. This was not a case of “manifest disproportion” between the offence committed and the sanction imposed. The cases in which the instant court had found such a manifest disproportion were ones in which individuals were found guilty of serious offences but given excessively light punishments. Here, an independent prosecutor weighed all the evidence in the balance and decided that there was only sufficient evidence to prosecute the Office of the Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis for offences under the 1974 Act. Moreover, there was no evidence to indicate that the “punishment” imposed (a fine of £175,000 and costs of £385,000) was excessively light for offences of that nature (see paras 283-285, 288 of the judgment).

---

Human rights – Right to life. The European Court of Human Rights dismissed the applicant's complaint that the decision not to prosecute any individuals in respect of the shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes by police officers following terror attacks and attempts in London was in breach of the procedural aspect of art 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights. It could not be said that the United Kingdom authorities had failed to discharge the procedural obligation, under art 2, to conduct an effective investigation into the shooting.