In the instant case, the PCC was trying to enforce an obligation to repair against the lay rectors. Their Lordships decided that this was not a public function. Lord Hope stated: 'The function which it is performing has nothing to do with the responsibilities which are owed to the public by the State’.

---

### Summary

Parochial Church Council served notice on lay rectors to repair chancel of parish church - Parochial Church Council not "public authority" obliged to act in accordance with Convention rights - Enforcing liability for chancel repairs did not infringe Convention rights - Parochial Church Council entitled to give effect to provisions of primary legislation which could not be read down despite incompatibility - European Convention on Human Rights Art 14, First Protocol Art 1 - Chancel Repairs Act 1932 - Human Rights Act 1988 ss 3, 6.

### Abstract

A lay rector's liability to repair the chancel of the parish church does not breach his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possessions under the Human Rights Act 1998. A, a parochial church council, appealed against a decision ([2001] EWCA Civ 713, [2002] Ch. 51) that it was unlawful for it to enforce W's obligation to pay for repairs to the chancel of a church. W, husband and wife, owned a farm, part of which was rectorial property; therefore W were liable as lay rectors to pay for all necessary repairs to the chancel of the local church under the [Chancel Repairs Act 1932](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60C12570E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ef1b05029ab48ffb99172f8d651c482&contextData=(sc.Default)) . W contended that A was a "public authority" which had acted unlawfully under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ef1b05029ab48ffb99172f8d651c482&contextData=(sc.Default)) by requiring them to pay for the repairs, thereby interfering with their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions under Sch.1 Part II Art.1 of the 1998 Act.

Held, allowing the appeal, that A was not a "core" public authority under s.6 of the 1998 Act. The Church of England was fundamentally a religious organisation and did not have the character of a governmental organisation, _[Holy Monasteries v Greece (A/301-A) (1995) 20 E.H.R.R. 1, [1994] 12 WLUK 114](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC314F900E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ef1b05029ab48ffb99172f8d651c482&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Hautanemi v Sweden (24019/94) (1996) 22 E.H.R.R. CD155, [1996] 1 WLUK 60](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBB707DA0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ef1b05029ab48ffb99172f8d651c482&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Even if A were a "hybrid" public authority by virtue of s.6(3)(b) of the 1998 Act because it performed certain functions of a public nature, the enforcement of W's obligation to pay for chancel repairs was a private rather than a public function; therefore, A was not in that respect a public authority pursuant to s.6(5) of the 1998 Act. Even assuming that A was a public authority, it would still be entitled to rely on s.6(2)(b) of the 1998 Act, which made it lawful for a public authority to give effect to primary legislation despite any incompatibility which could not be read down under s.3 of the 1998 Act. A's enforcement of W's liability to pay for the repairs did not constitute a breach of Sch.1 Part II Art.1 or Sch.1 Part I Art.14 of the 1998 Act. W had purchased the land in the knowledge that it was subject to the liability to pay for chancel repairs, and their peaceful enjoyment of the land involved the discharge of that burden. W were not being deprived of their possessions by being required to pay for the repairs', they were merely being required to fulfil an obligation that they had voluntarily assumed.