### Summary

Whole-life sentences imposed pursuant to the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 s.269](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F2D0CD0E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)) were not incompatible with the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)) and judges were to continue to impose them in exceptional cases.The review regime provided for by the [Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F2F2FB0E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)) was compatible with art.3, providing offenders serving whole-life sentences with the possibility of release in exceptional circumstances.

### Abstract

In conjoined proceedings, the Attorney General referred to the court as unduly lenient a minimum term of 40 years imposed on an offender (M) following his plea of guilty to murder, and the appellant (N) appealed against the imposition of a whole-life term of imprisonment following his conviction for murder.

The court had been specially constituted to consider the cases in the light of _[Vinter v United Kingdom (66069/09) (2016) 63 E.H.R.R. 1, [2013] 7 WLUK 244](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA3B5DEF0E9F911E292B8E54A2E2BA1FB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default))_, in which the European Court of Human Rights had held that the whole-life orders imposed in the case before it violated the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)) on the basis that they were not reducible. The power to make such orders was contained in the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 s.269](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F2D0CD0E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)). Pursuant to the [Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F2F2FB0E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)), the secretary of state had the power, in exceptional circumstances, to order the release on compassionate grounds of an offender serving a whole-life term. The court was required to analyse the decision in Vinter and to determine whether the legislative scheme governing the imposition and review of whole-life orders was compatible with art.3.

### Held

Reference allowed, appeal dismissed.

(1) Some crimes were so heinous that Parliament was entitled to proscribe, compatibly with the Convention, that the requirements of just punishment encompassed passing a sentence that included a whole-life order. Vinter did not cast any doubt on that proposition. There might be a legitimate dispute as to what such crimes were, but Member States had a margin of appreciation. In the United Kingdom it was for Parliament to set the framework under which the judge was to decide whether a whole-life order was the just punishment in any given case. 

Nothing in Vinter sought to impugn those provisions in the 2003 Act which entitled the judge to make a whole-life order (see paras [14-18](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). In Vinter, the ECtHR made it clear that there was no violation of art.3 if a prisoner in fact spent the whole of his life in prison. It did, however, consider that a punishment that was just at the outset might cease to be just with the passage of time. It held that for a life sentence to be compatible with art.3, there had to be a prospect of release and a possibility of review, and that while a judge could impose a whole-life order, a legal regime for review had to be in place at the time the sentence was passed, Vinter considered. Even if the ECtHR had determined that the imposition of a whole-life order violated art.3, s.269 could not be read down, and the only remedy would be a declaration of incompatibility (paras [18-24](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

The question was whether the review regime in s.30 of the 1997 Act was compatible with art.3 as interpreted by the ECtHR, and whether the court should adopt that interpretation. The s.30 regime was sufficiently certain to provide an adequate avenue of redress for an offender who claimed that his continued imprisonment was no longer justified. Pursuant to _[R. v Bieber (David Francis) [2008] EWCA Crim 1601, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 223, [2008] 7 WLUK 703](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7FBF48A05A0D11DD826ED4B610B79257/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default))_, the secretary of state was bound to exercise his s.30 power in a manner compatible with art.3, Bieber considered. The power of review arose if there were exceptional circumstances justifying the offender's release on compassionate grounds. It was not necessary to specify what such circumstances were; the term was sufficiently certain. 

Moreover, the term "compassionate grounds" had to be read in a manner compatible with art.3. The secretary of state had to consider all the relevant circumstances. Thus, s.30 gave offenders the possibility of release in exceptional circumstances. It was entirely consistent with the rule of law that applications were considered on an individual basis against the criteria that circumstances had changed to such an extent that the punishment was no longer justifiable. Judges were to continue to apply the 2003 Act regime and to impose, in exceptional cases, whole-life orders in accordance with [Sch.21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDAD45290E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1543b00a61ce4637a6b09ac9216fd99b&contextData=(sc.Default)) of that Act (paras [25-36](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) In M's case it was clear that the judge thought that, after Vinter, he had no power to make a whole-life order. In that respect, he had erred. Considering the matter afresh, a whole-life order was appropriate. The conviction was M's second for murder and had been committed while he was on day release from his life sentence. There were a number of aggravating features, and the only mitigation was his plea of guilty. The case was so serious that just punishment required a whole-life order. Similarly, N's conviction was his second for murder, occurring in prison where he was serving a life sentence. It was premeditated and involved the use of an improvised weapon, and the deceased had taken a significant time to die. There was no mitigation. The seriousness of the offence was exceptionally high and the judge had been right to make a whole-life order. The two cases were exceptional. The making of a whole-life order required detailed consideration of the circumstances of each case, and it would be rare for the circumstances to be such that a whole-life order was required (paras [47-50, 57-59](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).