### Summary

The practice of "kettling", which involved containing demonstrators behind a police cordon during a demonstration, did not amount to a breach of the rights, under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.5(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a52430f4f8c44508b6707c81268f1e07&contextData=(sc.Default)), of those contained, provided that it had been rendered unavoidable by circumstances beyond the control of the authorities and was necessary in order to avert a real risk of serious injury or damage.

### Abstract

The complainants (X, B, L and S) complained that the respondent United Kingdom had violated their rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.5(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a52430f4f8c44508b6707c81268f1e07&contextData=(sc.Default)).

Four complainants (X) had been contained within a police cordon for several hours during an anti-capitalism demonstration in central London. One had been taking part in the demonstration, the others were simply passers-by. The demonstration was one of a series on a similar theme, and previous demonstrations had resulted in public disorder. Police intelligence indicated that the demonstration presented a serious threat to public order, and a risk of damage to property and serious injury or death. It indicated that there was to be a gathering in Oxford Circus at 16.00. By 14.00, some 1,500 demonstrators had gathered there and more were joining them. The police therefore decided to cordon off Oxford Circus to contain the crowd. There was sufficient space within the cordon for people to walk about, and there was no crushing. Nonetheless, conditions were not comfortable; it was cold and wet, no food or water was provided, and there was no access to toilet facilities or shelter. During the afternoon, police efforts to disperse the crowd in a controlled manner were largely unsuccessful because a large, disorderly and sometimes violent crowd had gathered outside the cordon. Dispersal of the people within the cordon was eventually effected between 19.00 and 21.45. X were held within the cordon for between five-and-a-half and seven hours.

### Held

Complaint dismissed.

(Judges Tulkens, Spielmann and Garlicki dissenting) The instant court had not before considered the application of art.5(1) to the practice of containing a group of people on public order grounds, known as "kettling". A number of principles had to be borne in mind: the Convention had to be interpreted in the light of present-day conditions, and it had to be read as a whole and interpreted so as to promote consistency between its provisions. Article 5 was not to be interpreted so as to incorporate the freedom of movement requirements of [Protocol 4 art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEE38E6530F344F65805D5BF30522C1D5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a52430f4f8c44508b6707c81268f1e07&contextData=(sc.Default)) in respect of states, including the UK, which had not ratified that protocol. At the same time, Protocol 4 art.2(3) permitted restrictions on the right to liberty of movement, for example for the maintenance of public order, the prevention of crime or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. The court had previously held that interferences with the right to freedom of assembly were justified in certain circumstances, and it had also held that in certain well-defined circumstances, [art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a52430f4f8c44508b6707c81268f1e07&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a52430f4f8c44508b6707c81268f1e07&contextData=(sc.Default)) could impose positive obligations on the authorities to take measures to protect individuals at risk of serious harm from the criminal acts of others. When considering whether those obligations had been complied with, account had to be taken of the difficulties involved in policing modern societies, the unpredictability of human conduct, and the resource and priority-driven operational choices that had to be made. The police had to be afforded a degree of discretion in taking operational decisions. Police forces faced challenges that had perhaps been unforeseen when the Convention was drafted, and they had developed techniques, such as "kettling", to deal with them. Article 5 could not be interpreted in such a way as to make it impracticable for the police to fulfil their duties, provided that they complied with its underlying principle, which was to protect the individual from arbitrariness. Nor was it concerned with mere restrictions on liberty of movement. The difference between a deprivation of liberty and a restriction upon it was one of degree, and therefore the type, duration, effects and manner of implementation of the measure used had to be considered. In that regard, it was important to consider the context in which the measure was used, since there were some situations in which the public might have to endure restrictions on freedom of movement or liberty in the interests of the common good. Members of the public generally accepted that temporary restrictions might be placed on their freedom of movement in certain contexts, and such restrictions could not properly be described as deprivations of liberty within the meaning of art.5(1) if they were unavoidable because of circumstances beyond the control of the authorities, necessary to avert a real risk of serious injury or damage, and were kept to the minimum required (see paras 52-60 of judgment). In the instant case, there had been no violation of art.5(1). While the coercive nature, duration and effect of the containment pointed to a deprivation of liberty, the context was significant. The police had had no alternative but to establish the cordon to isolate and contain a large crowd and to avert a real risk of injury or damage. The complainants did not contend that they had been deprived of their liberty as soon as the cordon was imposed, and the court was unable to identify a point at which a restriction on their freedom of movement became a deprivation of their liberty. The police had made attempts at dispersal and had kept the situation under review, but the dangerous conditions that had necessitated the imposition of the cordon existed until early evening. Thus, on the basis of the exceptional facts, those within the cordon could not be said to have been deprived of their liberty within the meaning of art.5(1) (paras 64-69).