A, a Turkish citizen of Kurdish origin, alleged that in June 1993 she was arrested by the Turkish security forces, and that during a period of detention lasting three days she was beaten, tortured and raped. At the request of the Public Prosecutor she was examined by three doctors during July and August, each of whom confirmed that she had recently lost her virginity but two of whom had no experience of dealing with rape victims. She complained about her treatment to the Public Prosecutor but her complaint was stated to be without basis in a report dated May 1994. In December 1993, A complained to the Commission that she had been tortured and raped contrary to the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c7d69f3ccc148529d15982a752cd534&contextData=(sc.Default)) and that the ineffective investigation of her allegations by the Public Prosecutor constituted a denial of access to an effective remedy before a national authority in violation of Art.13. In hearing the case the Court accepted the facts as established by the Commission, namely that A was detained by the security forces, and while in custody was raped and subjected to various forms of ill treatment.

Held, upholding A's complaints, that 

(1) Art.3 prohibited in absolute terms torture on inhuman or degrading treatment. There were no exceptions and no derogations were permissible, even having regard to the imperatives of a public emergency threatening the life of the nation, _[Aksoy v Turkey (21987/93) (1997) 23 E.H.R.R. 553, [1996] 12 WLUK 395](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5423C9E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c7d69f3ccc148529d15982a752cd534&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The special stigma of "torture" attached only to deliberate inhuman degrading treatment causing very serious and cruel suffering, _[Ireland v United Kingdom (A/25) (1979-80) 2 E.H.R.R. 25, [1978] 1 WLUK 793](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICAAE50D0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c7d69f3ccc148529d15982a752cd534&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. In the instant case, the accumulation of acts of physical and mental violence inflicted on A, and especially the act of rape, amounted to torture in breach of Art.3, and 

(2) in respect of Art.13, where an individual had an arguable claim that he or she has been tortured by agents of the state, the notion of an effective remedy entailed, in addition to the payment of compensation where appropriate, a thorough and effective investigation capable of leading to the identification and punishment of those responsible and including effective access for the complainant to the investigatory procedure. In the instant case, A was entirely reliant on the Public Prosecutor to assemble the evidence necessary for corroborating her complaint, a complaint which by its nature should have alerted him to the need to conduct promptly a thorough and effective investigation. The Public Prosecutor's inquiry was ineffective in that, inter alia, he accepted too readily the security force's denial that A had been detained and was content to conduct this part of the investigation by correspondence, Aksoy v Turkey applied. Accordingly, there had been a violation of Art.13.