#key-case 

The procedural element of the challenge to the decision to prevent the bank from operating in the UK revolved around the lack of notice given to it of the Treasury's intention to make the direction under the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008.

Although the Act allowed the bank to apply to the High Court to challenge the action taken by the Treasury, the fact that this could only be done some time after the direction took effect meant that the damage to the bank's interests had effectively already been done. The direction was therefore quashed on procedural as well as substantive grounds.

---

**Facts:** Under the Counter-Terrorism Act 2007 the Treasury issued a direction prohibiting all parties in the UK financial sector from dealing with the claimant bank, because of its alleged connections with Iran's nuclear programme. The Act contained certain safeguards, including that the conditions in a direction had to be 'proportionate', having regard to the risk to the national interests of the UK.

**Held:** The action taken by the Treasury was unlawful in the sense that it was irrational and arbitrary and did not amount to a proportionate response in aiming for the intended objective. Lord Sumption stated firstly that Bank Mellat had effectively been singled out for harsh treatment, when there was a similar risk of other Iranian financial institutions facilitating the nuclear programme. Secondly, the court was not satisfied that the justification for the actions taken, given by ministers in Parliament, was entirely consistent with those advanced as part of the litigation.

---

### Summary

Measures taken by the Treasury under the [Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 Sch.7 Pt 3 para.13](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I50BF5C00C0FD11DD8B4FD4AD48C6C95E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee181c3f776f4c8fab9872a4e61891e1&contextData=(sc.Default)) to restrict the access of an Iranian bank and its UK subsidiaries to the UK financial markets on the ground that it posed a significant risk to national security by providing banking services to those involved in the development or production of nuclear weapons in Iran were arbitrary and disproportionate as well as being unlawful because of a failure to give prior notice and an opportunity to make advance representations.

### Abstract

The appellant Iranian bank (B) appealed against a decision (_[[2011] EWCA Civ 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4F33A6801F7311E09F26A81B7D54C425/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee181c3f776f4c8fab9872a4e61891e1&contextData=(sc.Default))_) upholding measures taken by the respondent Treasury to restrict B's access to financial markets in the United Kingdom.

The Treasury had imposed the restriction because B had been identified as having assisted Iran's nuclear weapons programme by providing banking and financial services to entities involved with them. The Treasury had made a direction under the [Counter-Terrorism Act 2008 Sch.7 Pt 3 para.13](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I50BF5C00C0FD11DD8B4FD4AD48C6C95E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee181c3f776f4c8fab9872a4e61891e1&contextData=(sc.Default)) prohibiting all persons operating in the UK financial sector from having any commercial dealings with B or its UK subsidiaries. The direction was laid before Parliament in October 2009 and came into force three days later. B applied under s.63 of the Act to set the order aside. It relied on a substantive argument that the order was irrational and disproportionate, and that the Treasury had failed to give adequate reasons for making it and/or its reasons were vitiated by irrelevant considerations or mistakes of fact. It also relied on a procedural argument that the Treasury had failed to give it an opportunity to make representations before making the order, as required by common law and by the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee181c3f776f4c8fab9872a4e61891e1&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [protocol 1 art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7CE4DF876E440C491BF5D88ED57F7DB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee181c3f776f4c8fab9872a4e61891e1&contextData=(sc.Default)). The High Court and the Court of Appeal dismissed B's appeals under both heads.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) (Lords Neuberger, Hope, Dyson and Reed dissenting) The essential question raised by B's substantive objections was whether the interruption of commercial dealings with B in the UK's financial markets bore some rational and proportionate relationship to the statutory purpose of hindering the pursuit by Iran of its weapons programmes. There were two serious difficulties about the conclusions of the courts below: first, they did not explain, let alone justify, the singling out of B, and second, their justification for the order was different to that advanced by ministers when the direction was laid before Parliament. The order had initially been explained as being attributable to specific concerns about B. However, both lower courts found that justification was not in any problem specific to B, but in a problem with Iranian banks generally. They considered the direction to be the only reasonably practicable means of ensuring that the facilities of an Iranian bank with international reach would not be used to facilitate Iran's weapons programme, yet the direction made no attempt to place restrictions on every Iranian bank, only on B. That was an arbitrary and irrational decision, as well as being a disproportionate measure. B's substantive challenge to the order was therefore made out (see paras [19-20, 24, 26-27](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (Per Lords Neuberger, Hope, Dyson and Reed) The Treasury had a wide margin of appreciation and sufficient grounds had been shown for making the direction only against B (paras [64-130, 132-133, 165-177, 197-201](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) (Lords Hope, Reed and Carnwath dissenting) B ought to have received notice of the Treasury's intention to make the direction and to have been given an opportunity to make representations. Those were among the oldest principles of public law. The only ground on which it could be said that the Treasury had no duty to consult B in advance was that such a duty was statutorily excluded. It was not enough for the Treasury to argue that the statutory right of recourse to the courts provided by s.63 was enough to satisfy any duty of fairness; it was not implicit in s.63 that the right of recourse to the courts was the sole guarantee of fairness, nor was it implicit that what the common law would otherwise require to achieve fairness was excluded. The Treasury also failed in its argument that the direction was required to be made in subordinate legislation, which was not an area where the courts could imply a duty of fairness or prior consultation; the lawfulness of a statutory power to make delegated legislation was reviewable by the courts. A statutory instrument was an instrument of the minister, who was empowered by the enabling Act to make it. The fact that it required the approval of Parliament did not alter that. The focus of the court was therefore on his decision to make it, not on Parliament's decision to approve it, _[Edinburgh DC v Secretary of State for Scotland 1985 S.C. 261, [1985] 6 WLUK 215](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FBC82C1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee181c3f776f4c8fab9872a4e61891e1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The Treasury's direction designating B was unlawful for want of prior notice or any procedure enabling it to be heard in advance. It was unnecessary to consider whether a duty of prior consultation arose by virtue of art.6 of the Convention (paras [28-29, 33-49](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (Per Lords Hope, Reed and Carnwath) There was no provision in Sch.7 for a designated person to be given a hearing before the order was made and, although the absence of such a provision did not automatically mean that Parliament had not intended there to be any such entitlement, it was a pointer towards such an intention. It was not for the courts to re-write the scheme intended by Parliament (paras [55-63, 134-159](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).