Where a tribunal has acted without jurisdiction, the courts have power to grant a declaration or an injunction in certain cases to prevent an injustice. It is, however, a matter for the discretion of the court, and that discretion should be exercised sparingly. The plaintiffs, 11 lightermen, members of the Watermen, Lightermen, Tugmen and Bargemen's Union, sought a declaration that they had been improperly suspended under the dock labour scheme contained in the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Order 1947 made pursuant to the [Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act 1946](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE9EA5170EC6011E3806DC5E7614FB8C6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6f8e88a408e6493ba37fde9f394e1c52&contextData=(sc.Default)) and they asked for an injunction restraining the defendants, the National Dock Labour Board and the firm employing them, from carrying out the suspension. The scheme provided that a suspended dockworker should have a right of appeal to an appeal tribunal set up under cl. 5(7) of the scheme by the local board to whom under the scheme the National Dock Labour Board had to delegate certain functions. In this case the appeal tribunal had dismissed the plaintiffs' appeal. Shortly before the hearing of the action the plaintiffs, on discovery, learned for the first time that their suspension from work and pay had been carried out, not by the local board, but by the port manager, and they amended their pleadings accordingly by alleging that the pretended suspension was illegal, ultra vires, and invalid, as it had not been made in the manner prescribed by cll. 15 and 16 of the scheme. These clauses dealt with the disciplinary functions of the local board in a case where a dock worker failed to comply with the lawful orders given to him by his employer.

Held, 

(1) in view of the scheme the local board had no power to delegate their disciplinary duties under cl. 16; 

(2) as the notice of suspension was in each case a nullity because it had not been given on a decision of the local board under cl. 16, the fact that there had been an unsuccessful appeal on it could not turn that which was a nullity into an effective suspension; 

(3) the port manager had no jurisdiction to adjudicate; an order of certiorari was of no use to the plaintiffs as they did not know of the illegality until long after the time for the order had run; in the circumstances, the court, in the exercise of its powers, should grant to the plaintiffs a declaration that their suspension was wrongful. _[Cooper v Wilson [1937] 2 K.B. 309, [1937] 3 WLUK 61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8E4142B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6f8e88a408e6493ba37fde9f394e1c52&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; and _[Andrews v Mitchell [1905] A.C. 78, [1904] 5 WLUK 41](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5E1EDF70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6f8e88a408e6493ba37fde9f394e1c52&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.