## Case Digest

1. A public corporation is not entitled to share the Crown's exemption from tax if its activities are not a province of government and it is an independent body not exercising functions created and required by the government. 
2. A subject is not taxable on a surplus of a government subvention over the cost of supplying the services for which the subvention is paid if the person ultimately entitled to the surplus is the person who paid the subvention. The British Broadcasting Corporation was assessed to tax on the surplus in certain years of the money received from the Postmaster-General for financing its home services over the cost of providing those services. The corporation was in practice independent; it was prohibited from receiving consideration for its services and from distributing profits; in a dissolution its surplus assets were to be distributed as the Postmaster-General should direct. 

On appeal, held that the corporation was not liable to the above tax. It was not entitled to Crown privilege, but the surplus was not taxable as it belonged to the Postmaster-General, who had supplied the fund out of which it arose. Per Willmer and Danckwerts L.JJ.: If the surplus had been taxable, a subscription by the corporation to a company jointly owned with other broadcasters as a vital part in the development of its news programmes would have been deductible. 

Per Danckwerts L.J.: The prohibition of taking money for its operations prevents tax from being charged as on a trading surplus. 

Per Diplock L.J.: I hope no one will ever again in a court of law use so imprecise a metaphor as "emanation of the Crown."(Decision of Wilberforce J. [1963] C.L.Y. 1750 reversed); ( _[Jones (Inspector of Taxes) v South West Lancashire Coal Owners Association Ltd [1927] A.C. 827, [1927] 7 WLUK 25](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID0CD64B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=67ca6551b00c4c06b0e188849c327fc4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Municipal Mutual Insurance Ltd v Hills (Inspector of Taxes) [1932] All E.R. Rep. 979, [1932] 3 WLUK 42](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I095151C1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=67ca6551b00c4c06b0e188849c327fc4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _Glasgow Corp Waterworks, Re 1 T.C. 28, [1947] 1 WLUK 241_ applied and _[Forth Conservancy Board v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1931] A.C. 540, [1931] 5 WLUK 16](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA881B060E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=67ca6551b00c4c06b0e188849c327fc4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _Odhams Press Ltd v Cook [1940] 3 All E.R. 15, [1940] 5 WLUK 18_ distinguished; _[Marshall Richards Machine Co v Jewitt 49 R. & I.T. 414, [1956] 1 WLUK 223](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I759DBE50E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=67ca6551b00c4c06b0e188849c327fc4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished and _Inland Revenue Commissioners v Huntley & Palmers 12 T.C. 1209, [1947] 1 WLUK 308_ distinguished).