**Facts:** The BoT had a policy of not awarding grants on items that individually cost less than £25. BO bought items for £20, and so did not qualify for a grant.

**Held:** The policy was within the BoT’s discretion; otherwise, it would be overwhelmed with trivial applications. There was evidence that the BoT had considered BO’s application carefully and had therefore not acted unlawfully.

---

There is no obligation on the Minister to make a grant in respect of each eligible product. He may approve a grant in respect of capital expenditure referable to an eligible purpose, in the case of dual purpose plant. B Co manufactured atmospheric gases and hydrogen. The atmospheric gases were delivered in liquid form, the hydrogen was not. The liquid gases were delivered in two types of tanker; one consisted of a tank mounted on a tractor, and at the rear, a bogey, and on the other, the tank was welded onto a four-wheeled lorry chassis. Hydrogen was delivered in cylinders, also of two types; the first type was mounted on a trailer in a batch of nine. They could readily be removed, but in practice the gas was delivered from the cylinders. The second type was a returnable container purchased by B Co at a cost of GBP 20. B Co applied to the Board of Trade for investment grants in respect of the tanks and cylinders which were refused.

Held, (1) that the tanks used for the liquid gases were part of the vehicles, and were excluded from grant by the [Industrial Development Act 1966 s.13(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC08AC8B1E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8e7f0920abf3460cb96dcc25a0e5e382&contextData=(sc.Default)); (2) that the hydrogen cylinders fixed to the trailer were part of the vehicle and similarly excluded, since, though detachable, they were not in fact detached; (3) that the returnable hydrogen cylinders were dual purpose plant, and the minister might, at his own discretion, pay a grant for them to the extent to which they were eligible, should the time come when the minister saw fit to remove the lower limit of GBP 25 of cost for single items. (British Oxygen Co v. Board of Trade [1969] C.L.Y. 3502 affirmed).