### Summary

The court set out the approach to be taken to non-party access to court records under [CPR r.5.4C](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I71C748804EBE11DB9FB2DB81EFB46719/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the court's inherent jurisdiction to determine what the principle of open justice required.

### Abstract

The appellant appealed against the Court of Appeal's decision that the respondent should have access under [CPR r.5.4C](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I71C748804EBE11DB9FB2DB81EFB46719/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default)) to records of the court in relation to proceedings in which the appellant had been a party and the respondent had been a non-party. The respondent cross-appealed on the basis that the court had wrongly limited the scope of r.5.4C.

The proceedings had concerned the appellant's alleged negligence in its manufacture of asbestos. They were settled between the trial and the delivery of judgment. The respondent represented an association supporting people suffering from asbestos-related diseases. It applied under r.5.4C for copies of all documents used at or disclosed for the trial, including the trial bundles and the trial transcripts, believing that the documents would contain information about the asbestos industry's knowledge of the dangers of asbestos. A master held that she had jurisdiction to make an order under either [r.5.4C(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I71C748804EBE11DB9FB2DB81EFB46719/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default)) or common law to grant access to all the material sought. The Court of Appeal set aside that order, holding that the jurisdiction under r.5.4C was more limited, but that the court had an inherent jurisdiction under which further documents could be obtained. It ordered the appellant to provide the respondent with all statements of case, witness statements, expert reports and written submissions, and that the application be listed before a High Court judge to decide whether any other document sought should be provided.

### Held

Appeal dismissed, cross-appeal allowed.

**CPR r.5.4C -** There were certain documents to which a non-party had a right of access under [r.5.4C(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I71C748804EBE11DB9FB2DB81EFB46719/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default)), and, under r.5.4C(2), what looked at first sight like a broad power to allow a non-party to obtain copies of "any other document filed by a party, or communication between the court and a party or other person". The copy was to be obtained "from the records of the court", but the CPR did not define those records or set out what they were to contain. The "records of the court" had to refer to those documents and records which the court kept for its own purposes. However, current practice as to what was kept in the records of the court could not determine the scope of the court's power to order access to case materials in particular cases. The purposes for which records were kept were completely different from the purposes for which non-parties could be given access (see paras [18-24](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Open justice -** Unless inconsistent with statute or rules of court, all courts and tribunals had an inherent jurisdiction to determine what the principle of open justice required in terms of access to documents or information placed before the court. The default position was that the public should be allowed access, not only to the parties' written submissions and arguments, but also to the documents which had been placed before the court and referred to during the hearing, _[R. (on the application of Guardian News and Media Ltd) v City of Westminster Magistrates' Court [2012] EWCA Civ 420, [2013] Q.B. 618, [2012] 4 WLUK 75](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I548109A07DDE11E19218F019F960533E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved. However, although the court had the power to allow access, an applicant had no right to be granted it, save to the extent that the rules granted such a right. It was for the applicant to explain why they sought access and how granting access would advance the open justice principle. The court had to carry out a fact-specific balancing exercise. On one hand would be the purpose of the open justice principle and the potential value of the information in advancing that purpose, and on the other would be any risk of harm disclosure would cause to an effective judicial process or the legitimate interests of others, _[Kennedy v Information Commissioner [2014] UKSC 20, [2015] A.C. 455, [2014] 3 WLUK 755](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I15B03E80B4E111E3AB12840362EEA953/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[BBC, Re [2014] UKSC 25, [2015] A.C. 588, [2014] 5 WLUK 255](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4CBAD7D0D6A811E3A123BC932BC70157/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5fdfc24b4444a9fa529fe3d0fe32b25&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Also relevant would be the practicalities and the proportionality of granting the request. It was highly desirable that the application was made during the trial. The applicant would be expected to pay the reasonable costs of access (paras [41-47](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Trial bundles, as compilations of copies of the relevant materials, were not the evidence or the documents in the case. Disclosure of a bundle marked up by someone involved in the case could not be ordered without the consent of the person holding it (para.[48](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Instant case -** The Court of Appeal had had jurisdiction to make the order that it had, and to make a wider order if it had been right to do so. However, the basis of making any wider order was the inherent jurisdiction in support of open justice, not r.5.4C. The Court of Appeal had taken a narrower view, both of the jurisdiction and the applicable principles. However, the appellant had argued its case on a narrow view of the court's jurisdiction. There was no realistic possibility of the judge making a more limited order than the Court of Appeal had. The order that the court should provide the respondent with documents pursuant to the r.5.4C(1) right of access, and that the appellant should provide the respondent with copies of witness statements, expert reports and submissions, would stand. The order that the matter be listed before a judge to determine whether any other document sought should be provided would be replaced by an order that the court determine whether the appellant should be required to provide a copy of any other document placed before the judge and referred to in the course of trial in accordance with the instant decision (paras [49-50](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Rules -** The court urged the bodies responsible for framing court rules in each part of the UK to consider the questions of principle and practice raised in the case (para.[51](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).