**Facts:** The case concerned a decision to make a compulsory purchase order (‘CPO’) on a property, as the local authority wanted to re-develop the adjacent area. An inspector’s report had stated, however, that it was not ‘reasonably necessary for the satisfactory development or use of the cleared area to acquire the property’.

**Held:** The court found that the Minister had confirmed the decision without any evidence to challenge the finding made in the inspector’s report. He had therefore erred, and the CPO was set aside.

---

The question of what is "reasonably necessary for the satisfactory development or use" of a cleared area within the [Housing Act 1957s. 43 (2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA544376057E711E38749A5862761D480/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=880ea5ac763c4960a1f4ec63b2e9c846&contextData=(sc.Default)) is one of fact and not one of planning policy. A compulsory purchase order for a slum clearance scheme included a first-class modern property. At an enquiry by the Minister's inspector, the local authority called no evidence from any planning officer or architect, but contended that the acquisition of the property was reasonably necessary for the satisfactory development of the cleared area within s. 43 (2) of the Housing Act 1957. The Inspector recommended that the property should be excluded from the order, but the Minister overruled the recommendation and confirmed the order as drawn.

Held, allowing the owners' appeal, that there was no evidence that the acquisition of the building was "reasonably necessary," the "ipse dixit" of the local authority was not enough, and the Minister's decision overruling the inspector's recommendation was ultra vires. (Decision of Lyell J. reversed. Dicta of Swift J. in _Sheffield Corp v Minister of Health (1935) 52 T.L.R. 171, [1935] 1 WLUK 23_ applied, and Lord Denning M.R. in _[Ashbridge Investments Ltd v Minister of Housing and Local Government [1965] 1 W.L.R. 1320, [1965] 7 WLUK 11](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6799EF90E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=880ea5ac763c4960a1f4ec63b2e9c846&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).