The implied purpose of the power to revoke television licences was not to raise revenue, but rather to ensure that such licences were not wrongfully used or obtained. Thus, Congreve should not have had his licence revoked merely because he had bought it before the licence fees increased.

---

Although the Secretary of State for the Home Department has an undoubted discretion under the [Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949, s. 1 (4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60A97EC0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a03391d7407b4151bed9a79c5b878414&contextData=(sc.Default)) to revoke a TV licence, that discretion is fettered to the extent that the courts will intervene if it is exercised arbitrarily or improperly. P, on finding out that the price of the TV licence was about to be increased, bought a new licence at the old rate, before the expiry of the old licence, thus saving himself about GBP 6. So did about 25,000 other people. The Secretary of State for the Home Department, in order to frustrate the device, threatened that unless the extra GBP 6 were paid, the licence would be revoked under s. 1 (4) of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949.

Held, the Minister's action was unfair, unjust and unlawful. It was an improper exercise of the discretionary power as a means of levying money which the executive had no authority to demand, and the court could and should intervene to declare the proposed revocation unlawful, invalid and of no effect. When in the course of submissions, counsel for the Home Office had said that if the court interfered, it would not be long before the powers of the court would be called in question, the court trusted that that was not said seriously, but only as a piece of advocate's licence. ( _[Attorney General v Wilts United Dairies Ltd (1922) 38 T.L.R. 781, [1922] 1 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9C9D9890E57111DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a03391d7407b4151bed9a79c5b878414&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied _[Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 K.B. 223, [1947] 11 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I68410501E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a03391d7407b4151bed9a79c5b878414&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Padfield v Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1968] A.C. 997, [1968] 2 WLUK 60](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I192CC480E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a03391d7407b4151bed9a79c5b878414&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).