F was employed as a civil servant. In September and October 1990 F participated in certain demonstrations against government corruption, including allegations made against the Minister of Agriculture. The Permanent Secretary of the Minister of Agriculture claimed that F was acting in breach of the restraints imposed on civil servants by the Civil Service Act (Laws of Antigua and Barbuda) 1984 s.10(2)(a) , and interdicted F from performing the functions of his office pending disciplinary proceedings being brought. Section 10(2) of the 1984 Act prohibited civil servants from, inter alia, publishing any expression of opinion on any matter of political controversy in any public place. In November 1990 F issued an originating motion seeking a declaration that s.10(2)(a) of the 1984 Act was unconstitutional because, inter alia, it infringed the right to freedom of speech contained in the [Antigua and Barbuda Constitution Order 1981 Sch.1s.12](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA3D5AA90BC0D11DFB7D4ED6024004E14/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=772907b2272a4e3095e6c2b4e36a3b98&contextData=(sc.Default)) . 

The Minister contended that the provision in question was saved by s.12(4) of the Constitution, which provided, inter alia, that no law should be held to be inconsistent with the right to freedom of speech to the extent that it "imposes restrictions upon public officers that are reasonably required for the proper performance of their functions", and that the restrictions imposed are "reasonably justifiable in a democratic society". F's application was upheld at first instance, but the Court of Appeal allowed the Minister's appeal, holding that even though s.10(2)(a) of the 1984 Act was unconstitutional as it stood, its validity could be ensured by implying into the subsection the words "when [the civil servant's] forbearance from such publication is reasonably required for the proper performance of his official functions". F appealed to the Privy Council.

Held, allowing the appeal, that 

(1) the general proposition that civil servants held a unique status in a democratic society did not necessarily justify a substantial invasion of their basic rights and freedoms. The proper balance to be struck between freedom of expression and the duty of a civil servant properly to fulfil his or her functions had to take account of factors such as the growth of the public sector, the importance of robust public discussion of public issues and common sense, _Fraser and Public Service Staff Relations Board, Re (1985) 23 D.L.R. (4th) 122_ considered. The restrictions set out in s.10(2) of the 1984 Act constituted a blanket restraint on all civil servants from communicating to anyone any expression or view on any matter of political controversy which was excessive, and not reasonably required for the proper performance of their functions, _[Vogt v Germany (A/323) (1996) 21 E.H.R.R. 205, [1995] 9 WLUK 152](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE7AF96C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=772907b2272a4e3095e6c2b4e36a3b98&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, and accordingly was unconstitutional; 

(2) s.10(2) of the 1984 Act could not be saved by the implication of words into the subsection. The implication of words into a statute could only be permissible where there was an ambiguity or an omission. Section 10(2)(a) was perfectly clear and entirely free from any such ambiguity. Even if such implication were permissible, the provision would still not be saved since the provision as amended would not be sufficiently precise to enable any given civil servant to regulate his conduct and so would not conform to the principle of legal certainty, _G v Germany (1989) 60 D. & R. 256, [1989] 1 WLUK 117_ considered. The rule applied to all civil servants without distinction so it was left to the individual in any given circumstances to decide whether he was or was not complying with it, and 

(3) s.10(2) of the 1984 Act was not "reasonably justifiable in a democratic society" because the infringement it imposed on the right to freedom of speech went further than necessary to achieve the intended aim, _Nyambirai v National Social Security Authority [1996] 1 L.R.C. 64, [1996] 1 WLUK 79_ applied.