### Summary

The test to be applied by an appellate court to an assessment of the trial court's decision in respect of a statutory defence of "lawful excuse", when [ECHR](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default)) rights were engaged in a criminal matter, was that in _[Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v Bairstow [1956] A.C. 14, [1955] 7 WLUK 81](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0109630E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_. Therefore, an appeal would be allowed where there was an error of law material to the decision which was apparent on the face of the case, or if the decision was one which no reasonable court could have reached on the facts. Deliberate obstructive conduct by protesters was capable of constituting a lawful excuse for the purposes of an offence under the [Highways Act 1980 Pt IX s.137(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF036F510E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default)) where the impact of that obstruction on other highway users was more than de minimis.

### Abstract

The appellants (Z) appealed against a decision of the Divisional Court directing their conviction for wilful obstruction of a highway without lawful authority or excuse, contrary to the [Highways Act 1980 Pt IX s.137(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF036F510E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default)), after their acquittal by the magistrates' court.

Z were activists opposed to the arms trade. They held a peaceful protest at the Defence and Security International arms fair at the Excel Centre in London by lying down on one side of an approach road leading to the centre and locking themselves to lock boxes. It took police 90 minutes to remove them. Z pleaded not guilty and were acquitted on the ground that the prosecution had failed to prove that their obstruction of the highway was unreasonable. The district judge considered their right to freedom of expression under [ECHR art.10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE7756732A7B4BBC93274BDE4496FB0F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default)) and their right to freedom of peaceful assembly under [art.11](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2339D74CB454466883FBF1B148830266/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default)), holding that their action was limited, targeted and peaceful. The DPP appealed by way of case stated to the Divisional Court. Z gave evidence of their long-standing opposition to the arms trade and of their belief that illegal activity was taking place at the arms fair, which the Government had failed to prevent. The Divisional Court applied the test in _[B (A Child) (Care Proceedings: Appeal), Re [2013] UKSC 33, [2013] 1 W.L.R. 1911, [2013] 6 WLUK 280](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I618D3C80D3BA11E2ADB3E30A31F9CAE9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ in holding that the district judge's assessment of proportionality was wrong for failure to strike a fair balance between the competing rights and interests at stake. It also held that his conclusion was unsustainable on the undisputed fact that Z had blocked the carriageway for significant periods of time. The Divisional Court directed that convictions be entered, but certified points of law of general public importance. The Supreme Court granted permission to appeal on those points, namely (i) the test to be applied by an appellate court to an assessment of the trial court's decision in respect of a statutory defence of "lawful excuse" when Convention rights were engaged in a criminal matter; and (ii) whether deliberate physically obstructive conduct by protesters was capable of constituting a lawful excuse for the purposes of [s.137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF036F510E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default)) where the impact of that obstruction on other highway users was more than de minimis and prevented them from passing along the highway, or was capable of doing so.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

**"Lawful excuse": test** - The conventional approach of the Divisional Court to appeals by way of case stated in criminal proceedings was to apply an appellate test of whether the court's conclusion was one which was reasonably open to it. Appeals by way of case stated from tribunals of fact were only allowed on questions of law, _[Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v Bairstow [1956] A.C. 14, [1955] 7 WLUK 81](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0109630E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. In criminal proceedings, a conclusion was open to challenge on the ground that it was one which no reasonable court could have reached even if it was categorised as a conclusion of fact, _[Bracegirdle v Oxley [1947] K.B. 349, [1946] 12 WLUK 63](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7987A080E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[D'Souza v DPP [1992] 1 W.L.R. 1073, [1992] 10 WLUK 184](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I93B43810E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. In the light of that well-established approach, the Divisional Court had been wrong to decide that there was a different appellate test where the appeal raised an assessment of proportionality. Although the approach to whether there was an error of law in relation to an issue of proportionality determined in a case stated was that set out in B (A Child), Edwards v Bairstow remained the overarching appellate test. In accordance with that test and B (A Child), where the statutory defence depended upon an assessment of proportionality, an appeal would lie if there was an error in the reasoning on the face of the case which undermined the cogency of the conclusion on proportionality. That assessment fell to be made on the basis of the primary and secondary factual findings set out in the case stated, unless there was no evidence for them or they were findings which no reasonable tribunal could have reached, B (A Child) considered (see paras [29, 35, 37, 40-43, 49, 52-54](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Deliberately obstructive conduct** - The second certified question raised the issue as to how intentional action by protesters disrupting traffic impacted on a proportionality assessment under art.10 and art.11. The exercise of those freedoms required a certain degree of tolerance to disruption to ordinary life, including traffic disruption, _[Kudrevicius v Lithuania (37553/05) (2016) 62 E.H.R.R. 34, [2015] 10 WLUK 406](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0E31A40176E11E68494AE0F033C7C43/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Both the disruption and whether it was intentional were relevant in evaluating proportionality (paras [57, 62, 68](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Factors relevant to proportionality assessment** - Intentional action that was more than de minimis did not automatically mean that any interference with protesters' rights was proportionate. An obstruction could have different impacts depending on the commercial or residential nature of the highway's location, _[Nagy v Weston [1965] 1 W.L.R. 280, [1964] 11 WLUK 102](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0A24F570E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The extent of the actual interference with the rights of others was relevant, as were the importance of the precise location to the protesters, whether the obstruction was targeted at the object of the protest and the nature and extent of actual and potential breaches of domestic law, _[City of London Corp v Samede [2012] EWCA Civ 160, [2012] 2 All E.R. 1039, [2012] 2 WLUK 657](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I52DBB6205DB511E193AAAF5AB3AC65B2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [9, 17, 70, 73-77](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Cogency of district judge's conclusion on proportionality** - The district judge had been entitled to take into account that the protest was intended to be peaceful, did not give rise to any form of disorder and related to a matter of general concern, namely the legitimacy of the arms fair and whether it involved the marketing of potentially unlawful items. Moreover, he had not found that there was a complete obstruction of the highway, but only to the side of the approach road leading to the Excel Centre. The appraisal as to whether the duration of the obstruction was "limited" or for "a insignificant period of time" was a fact-sensitive determination for the district judge and depended on the context, including the number of people present and the availability of alternative routes. It was also appropriate that he had considered Z's peaceful intentions. The issue before the district judge did not involve the proportionality of the police in arresting Z, but rather proportionality in the context of the alleged commission of a s.137 offence. There was no apparent error in his reasoning such as to undermine the cogency of his conclusion on proportionality (paras [80, 82-87](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Per Lady Arden (concurring)** - The standard of appellate review applicable to the evaluation of proportionality was that laid down in _[R. (on the application of R) v Chief Constable of Greater Manchester [2018] UKSC 47, [2018] 1 W.L.R. 4079, [2018] 7 WLUK 692](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC3FC55B093E811E8AE0AFE840190C876/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=da56e815bbb94b20ae885bd9c96d018e&contextData=(sc.Default))_, which refined the test in B (A Child). R v Chief Constable established a nuanced correctness standard which was limited to the evaluative assessment of proportionality and did not extend to the underlying primary and secondary facts to which the test in Edwards v Bairstow continued to apply. That test imposed a "reasonableness" standard, so that the trial judge's primary and secondary factual findings would stand unless it was shown that they were such as no reasonable tribunal could have made (para.[99](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Per Lord Sales and Lord Hodge (dissenting in part)** - It was not coherent to say that an appellate court should apply a different approach in the context of appeal by way of case stated as compared with other situations. The legal rule to be applied was the same in each case. The procedural route by which the appeal proceeded could not change the substantive law. The district judge's assessment had failed to take proper account of the extent of the obstruction caused by the protesters and their evident intention to block the highway for as long as possible. Its actual duration was due to the swift action of the police. Those were material factors which had been left out of account and vitiated the district judge's proportionality assessment. Consequently, the Divisional Court had been entitled to allow the appeal. However, the facts as set out in the stated case did not allow it simply to conclude that the police action was proportionate and it had gone too far in substituting convictions. The case should have been remitted to the magistrates' court for further examination of the facts (paras [134, 143-151](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).