### Summary

Although the statutory powers available to the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police to impose conditions on demonstrations under the [Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 s.134](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79BBA4D0E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) could be delegated, the conditions imposed on a certain demonstrator were ultra vires as they lacked clarity.

### Abstract

The appellant Director of Public Prosecutions appealed by way of case stated against a decision of the magistrates' court that there was no case for the respondent (H) to answer.

H had been conducting a permanent demonstration in Parliament Square, London against the government's policy on Iraq. Following the enactment of the [Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I33E4E120E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)), H sought authorisation from the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police to continue his demonstration, mostly on his own, but from time to time with others. A superintendent of the police authorised the demonstration subject to certain conditions imposed under [s.134(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79BBA4D0E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 2005 Act. H was subsequently summonsed for breach of the conditions. The magistrates held that the commissioner's powers could not be delegated and that the conditions imposed lacked clarity and were not workable. The questions to be determined were (i) whether the statutory power available to the commissioner to impose conditions on demonstrations under [s.134](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79BBA4D0E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 2005 Act could be delegated by applying the principles in _[Carltona Ltd v Commissioners of Works [1943] 2 All E.R. 560, [1943] 10 WLUK 5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF7186580E57011DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ or only as permitted by the [Police Act 1996 s.9A](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC5EEE240E44E11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) to [s.9F](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I814020A0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)); (ii) whether the conditions imposed on H were ultra vires or incompatible with the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [Art.11](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2339D74CB454466883FBF1B148830266/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) , as they lacked clarity.

### Held

Appeal allowed in part.

(1) Where a statutory power was conferred on an officer, who was himself a creature of statute, the question of whether that officer had the power to delegate was dependent upon the interpretation of the relevant statute. Where the responsibilities of the office were such that delegation was inevitable there would be an implied power to delegate unless the statute, expressly or by implication, provided to the contrary, Carltona, _[R. v Chief Constable of Greater Manchester Ex p. Lainton [2000] I.C.R. 1324, [2000] 3 WLUK 788](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3A464740E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of Chief Constable of the West Midlands) v Birmingham Magistrates Court [2002] EWHC 1087 (Admin), [2002] Po. L.R. 157, [2002] 5 WLUK 915](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I78D80A20E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1bfb58463c364b43b386ab195b6266a4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The general provisions contained in s.9A to s.9F of the 1996 Act permitted delegation of the commissioner's powers and duties in circumstances where, having regard to the nature of those powers, there was no implicit power to delegate. However, those powers did not exclude the possibility of delegation to persons other than the deputy or an assistant commissioner where, having regard to the nature of the powers and duties, a power to delegate was implicit. Having regard to the statutory role of the commissioner, it was to be expected that Parliament would confer on the commissioner the powers to be exercised by the police, and leave the commissioner to delegate the exercise of those powers as appropriate. 

(2) The authorisation of a demonstration under s.134 of the 2005 Act was mandatory, provided that the requisite notice had been given. The discretion conferred by s.134 of the 2005 Act was restricted to determining the conditions to be specified in the authorisation. It was clear that Parliament could not have intended that the commissioner should determine the conditions himself, given the large number of demonstration applications made. The determination of appropriate conditions was a technical matter dependent upon the precise location and nature of the demonstration planned. 

(3) The conditions imposed were demonstrated to be unworkable and, as such, were plainly not reasonable and did not satisfy the test of certainty required when considering whether the restrictions on Convention rights were "according to law".