### Summary

The state was obliged under [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default)) to conduct an effective investigation into crimes involving serious violence to persons, whether that had been carried out by state agents or individual criminals. For the right to be practical and effective, an individual who had suffered ill-treatment had a right to claim compensation against the state where there had been a failure to conduct a sufficient investigation. To succeed in a claim, a claimant had to establish that there were serious defects in the police investigation into the particular case; there was no need to establish that there were serious failings of a systemic nature.

### Abstract

The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis appealed against a decision that he had breached the [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default)) rights of the respondent women by failing to conduct effective investigations into sexual assaults committed by a serial offender.

The women were among many who had been attacked by the offender over a six-year period. The state was under a general duty to investigate ill-treatment amounting to a violation of art.3. The judge found that there had been systemic and operational failures by the police in their investigation that amounted to a breach of the women's art.3 rights.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

**Was the duty to investigate a public duty or one owed to individual victims of the breach of art.3, and was it a systemic or an operational duty?** (Lords Hughes and Mance dissenting) _[MC v Bulgaria (39272/98) (2005) 40 E.H.R.R. 20, [2003] 12 WLUK 130](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0554AF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ concerned the nature of the duty. MC did not suggest that deficiencies in an investigation always had to be accompanied by systemic defects to constitute a violation of art.3. However, simple errors or isolated omissions would not give rise to a violation of art.3: errors had to be egregious and significant. While the European Court of Human Rights had in MC disavowed close examination of investigation errors, that was because it was a supranational court: it had left that task to national courts, MC considered. There was clear ECtHR case law that the state was obliged under art.3 to conduct an effective investigation into crimes involving serious violence to persons (see paras [26-58](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs"), paras [85-99](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Was state complicity a prerequisite?** The ECtHR had consistently held that it was not required that there be state involvement in the acts alleged to amount to breach of art.3, MC applied (paras [59-62](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Was there a right to claim compensation against the state?** Compensation was not automatically payable for breaches of the art.3 duty to investigate and prosecute crime, _[R. (on the application of Greenfield) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 14, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 673, [2005] 2 WLUK 406](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79744A20E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Compensation for breach of an ECHR right was intended to uphold rights standards; it served a different purpose from damages in a civil action, _[Van Colle v Chief Constable of Hertfordshire [2008] UKHL 50, [2009] 1 A.C. 225, [2008] 7 WLUK 926](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID4F993F05EC411DDAB7DC9767090C799/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The judge had considered that the police's catalogue of failures warranted compensation irrespective of the fact that the women had received damages from the offender and criminal injuries compensation (paras [63-65](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Was it relevant that the courts recognised no common-law duty of care on the police in relation to the manner in which officers prevented and investigated crime?** The police's exemption at common law was not to be extended to claims advanced under the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default)). The bases of liability were different. No assumption should be made that the policy reasons underlying the common-law exemption applied to liability for breach of ECHR rights (paras [67-69](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Should national courts make a decision where the ECtHR had not?** National courts, as public authorities, had to give effect to ECHR rights under [s.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act. Had the ECtHR jurisprudence not been clear, the instant court's decision would not have been influenced or inhibited by any absence of authoritative ECtHR guidance, _[R. (on the application of Ullah) v Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26, [2004] 2 A.C. 323, [2004] 6 WLUK 350](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7F87EC50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[Moohan, Petitioner [2014] UKSC 67, [2015] A.C. 901, [2014] 12 WLUK 615](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I91BD7250861311E4910AF54E2E85D36A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=43686b64aca244fbaf08effe9ab6ac0e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [73-79](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(Per Lord Hughes)** The ECtHR cases showed that the test for the duty to investigate was whether the state had a proper structure of legal and policing provision designed to punish violence when it occurred and had administered that structure in good faith and with proper regard to the gravity of the behaviour under consideration. They did not point to a test of ex post facto assessment of whether the investigation had been careless or made mistakes which should not have been made (para.[127](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(Per Lord Mance)** Whereas the ECtHR had previously distinguished between operational and systemic errors, there was now a distinction between simple errors or isolated omissions in the investigation and more serious failings (para.[151](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).