## Case Digest

On the true construction of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Acts of 1974 and 1976 s.13(1) the test whether an act is done in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute is subjective, and the person doing it is entitled to immunity from tort if, at the time, he honestly believed that it might help a party to a trade dispute achieve its objectives. The Government resolved to provide no further public funds to the British Steel Corporation. 

BSC was unable to pay its employees a rise in wages which was satisfactory to the union, the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation. A strike was called. ISTC was dissatisfied with its effect, and in order to put pressure on the Government to supply money, called out steel workers in the private sector, where there was no dispute. The private sector companies sought injunctions against the ISTC. The judge refused the application following Express Newspapers the Court of Appeal allowed the companies' appeal. On appeal by the ISTC, held, allowing the appeal, that on the true construction of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Acts of 1974 and 1976 s.13(1) the test whether an act was done in furtherance of a trade dispute was subjective. It was not permissible to have regard to the remoteness of this act done from the immediate source of the dispute, except as a test of the genuineness of those responsible. The defendants honestly believed that their acts might help in their trade dispute, and they were entitled to the immunity from tort given by s.13. (_[Express Newspapers v McShane [1980] A.C. 672, [1979] 12 WLUK 113](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA4EFB000E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75e4277f5b3a4a8f8917f26ec2386761&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[NWL Ltd v Woods (The Nawala) (No.2) [1979] 1 W.L.R. 1294, [1979] 10 WLUK 219](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I118032D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75e4277f5b3a4a8f8917f26ec2386761&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).