1. Before making an order under the Municipal Ordinance (Ceylon) s.277(1) dissolving and superseding a council, the Minister must give it an opportunity to be heard in its own defence. 
2. Even if improperly made, such an order is not a nullity and is voidable only at the election of the council. The Minister sent a commissioner to inquire into complaints against a municipal council. The appellant, the mayor, gave the commissioner every facility, but the commissioner did not ask any questions or give any member of the council an opportunity of expressing views. He made his report to the Minister who, on the same day, made an order stating that the council was incompetent to perform its duties and that, pursuant to s.277 of the Ordinance, he directed it be dissolved and superseded. The appellant took proceedings for mandates in the nature of writs of certiorari and quo warrant to quash the order, and for an interim injunction to restrain the special; commissioners appointed to exercise the functions of the council and the appellant from boing so.

Held, 

(1) that the rule audi alteram partem was applicable to a decision of the Minister to make an order under s.277(1) on the ground of the council's incompetence; moreover, it also applied because the effect of order was to deprive the council of its property; but 

(2) that, though the order could have been held void ab initio in an action by the council, it was so voidable only at the council's election and was not a nullity; hence, as the appellant was not representing the council in the proceedings and it was not shown that the council could not have been petitioner, he was not entitled to complain of the order and could not maintain the proceedings. Appeal dismissed. ( _Sugathadasa v Jayasinghe (1958) 59 N.L.R. 457, [1958] 1 WLUK 552_ disapproved; dictum of Byles J. in _[Cooper v Wandsworth Board of Works 143 E.R. 414, [1863] 4 WLUK 37](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I54DC7490E57111DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b9f4f48abbfb411192f28f1aa3108124&contextData=(sc.Default))_ at p. 194 applied and dicta of Lord Evershed and Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest in _[Ridge v Baldwin [1964] A.C. 40, [1963] 3 WLUK 60](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I882100E0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b9f4f48abbfb411192f28f1aa3108124&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).