### Summary

The Immigration Appeal Tribunal and the Court of Appeal had the power to review a decision of the tribunal where it was shown that an important part of the tribunal's reasoning was based on ignorance or mistake of fact, and to admit new evidence to demonstrate the mistake.

### Abstract

E, an Egyptian national, had appealed against the Immigration Appeal Tribunal's decision not to grant him permission to appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim. E claimed asylum on the ground that he was a sympathiser of the Muslim Brotherhood and if returned to Egypt he would be detained and tortured. The tribunal concluded that the arrest of Muslim Brotherhood members was related to the 2000 Eygptian elections. E sought to challenge that finding by relying on two reports, which had come into being since the appeal tribunal hearing but before the promulgation of its decision. E's challenge failed because the reports had not been before the tribunal at the hearing. E argued that 

(1) the new evidence had been available before the date of the promulgation of the tribunal's decision and would have had a material effect on the determinations, and 

(2) where such material was in existence before the decision date but was first drawn to the attention of the tribunal on the making of an application for permission to appeal, the tribunal had the power to reopen its decision in order to take it into account.

Held, allowing the appeal, that the tribunal had wrongly failed to consider the new evidence. The tribunal remained seized of E's appeal and was able to take account of new evidence up until the time when its decision was notified to the parties. The reasons given by the tribunal for refusing to consider E's new evidence were erroneous in law. Where there was delay before the tribunal's decision was issued, new evidence might emerge which undermined the basis of the conclusions reached at the hearing. If so, it could not automatically be excluded where justice required it to be taken into account. When considering E's application for leave to appeal, the tribunal had a discretion to direct a rehearing under the [Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003 r.30(2)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE97856C0E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ac259001ec14b5e9f0fdbb188f340bf&contextData=(sc.Default)) , and that power was not dependent on the tribunal finding an arguable error of law in its original decision. To justify reopening the case, the tribunal needed to be satisfied that there was a risk of serious injustice, _[R. v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board Ex p. A [1999] 2 A.C. 330, [1999] 3 WLUK 494](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3E8D8DE0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ac259001ec14b5e9f0fdbb188f340bf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, and in doing so, it had to have regard to the principles in _[Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 W.L.R. 1489, [1954] 11 WLUK 110](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6601711E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ac259001ec14b5e9f0fdbb188f340bf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , Ladd v Marshall considered.