**Standing:** Given to Greenpeace to challenge a licensing decision concerning the Sellafield nuclear processing plant in Cumbria.

**Factors the court took into account:**
- Expertise and reputation of Greenpeace
- Its genuine concern for environmental issues
- Greenpeace had 2,500 supporters who lived in Cumbria and were, therefore, arguably affected.

---

### Abstract

In deciding whether an applicant had locus standi the court should take into account the nature of the applicant, its interests in the issues raised, the remedy it sought to achieve and the nature of the relief sought. The company was authorised to discharge radioactive waste from its premises. In 1992 it applied for new authorisations for its new thermal oxide reprocessing plant and, pending the grant of those authorisations, sought and obtained a variation of the existing authorisations to enable it to test the new plant. G, an environmental organisation of international standing with 2,500 supporters in the area, sought judicial review of the decision to vary the existing authorisations. It was argued that the operations were different from those covered by the original variations and so a variation was not appropriate and that, if the new authorisations sought by the company were not granted, the testing would have been useless and so unjustified. The respondent argued that G had no locus standi and that under the Radioactive Substances Act 1960 the variations could validly be varied.

Held, dismissing the application, that G did have locus standi but that the respondent had not exercised its powers unlawfully. G was a responsible body with a valid interest in the matters raised and a substantial body of support in the area that might not otherwise have a voice. Section 6 of the Act permitted the company to dispose of any radioactive waste from its premises which included the subject site. The company had a wide power to extend or contract its activities. It was open to the respondents to permit the discharge of radioactive waste under the existing authorisations since the waste resulted from operations at the company's premises ( _[R. v Monopolies and Mergers Commission Ex p. Argyll Group Plc [1986] 1 W.L.R. 763, [1986] 3 WLUK 155](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5A8DFB10E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ed823e3fcc69427e923c9d262d7c61e8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[R. v Inland Revenue Commissioners Ex p. National Federation of Self Employed and Small Businesses Ltd [1982] A.C. 617, [1981] 4 WLUK 105](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D8C8350E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ed823e3fcc69427e923c9d262d7c61e8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[R. v Secretary of State for the Environment Ex p. Rose Theatre Trust Co [1990] 1 Q.B. 504, [1989] 7 WLUK 237](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I655A9170E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ed823e3fcc69427e923c9d262d7c61e8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ not followed).