No judicial or quasi-judicial duty is imposed on the Minister of Town and Country Planning under s.1 of the New Towns Act, 1946, and Sch.J thereto. On the contrary, the Minister's duties under that section and under that schedule are purely administrative, but the Act prescribes certain methods of, or steps in, the discharge of those duties. 

Thus, before issuing a draft order the Minister must satisfy himself that the scheme is a sound scheme, and in order to make it possible for the Minister to obtain the necessary information which will enable him to consider the soundness of the scheme of the designation, objections are invited, and, where they are not withdrawn, the Minister is under a duty to appoint a person other than himself to hold a public inquiry, and to consider the report of that person. 

Consequently, in such a case the only ground of challenge by objectors under s.16 of the Town and Country Planning Act, 1944, must be either that the Minister did not, in fact, consider the report and the objections, or that his mind was so foreclosed that he gave no genuine consideration to them. Before the New Towns Act, 1946, came into force the Minister of Town and Country Planning made a speech indicating his determination that a proposed scheme in respect of a new town should go through. A public local inquiry was held in accordance with the provisions of the Act, in order to deal with objections. One of the chief objections was that the scheme did not solve the questions of water supply and sewage disposal. However, there was evidence that these problems were capable of a solution. 

Henn Collins, J., quashed the Minister's order on the ground that the Minister did not have an open mind when he made the order. The House of Lords held that the appellants had not established either that in the respondent's speech he had forejudged any genuine consideration of the objections or that he had not genuinely considered the objections at the later stage when they were submitted to him.