### Summary

There was no real possibility of bias from the fact that the medical member of a disability appeal tribunal was a doctor employed by the Benefits Agency. The fair minded observer would have no reason to think that the doctor would not apply her medical knowledge and experience in an impartial way.

### Abstract

There was no real possibility of bias arising from the fact that the medical member of a disability appeal tribunal was a doctor employed by the Benefits Agency. The fair minded observer would have no reason to think that the doctor would not apply her medical knowledge and experience in an impartial way. The appellant (G) appealed against a decision allowing the secretary of state's appeal against the grant of G's claim for disability living allowance. G had alleged that there was a reasonable apprehension that the medical member of the disability appeal tribunal (X) had been biased since she was serving as a panel member while continuing to provide reports for the Benefits Agency. For a number of years X had provided reports for the Benefits Agency as an examining medical practitioner (EMP). The Benefits Agency had then contracted out the provision of certain types of EMP reports to a company (S) which had employed a number of doctors, including X, on a part-time sessional fee-paid basis. It was in that capacity that X had continued to carry out examinations of claimants in their homes and provided reports in disability allowance and incapacity benefit cases. Some of the reports involved an "all work" test which was carried out at a Benefits Agency medical centre. Medical members who prepared reports in "all work" cases were advised that, to avoid any suggestion of bias, they should not sit on a tribunal hearing "all work" test appeals. X frequently sat as a tribunal member hearing appeals relating to benefits other than those in "all work" test cases. The tribunal had had before it medical evidence from G's cardiologist, who accepted G's claim, but it preferred the evidence of the EMP and G's general practitioner who both took the view that G's condition was better than he had claimed. The tribunal of commissioners had considered that where EMP reports were in competition with other evidence, an ordinary member of the public would have a real concern that doctors who prepare EMP reports would tend to lean in favour of accepting reports from other doctors in that group. The Court of Session disagreed and stated that a reasonable observer would have known that X and other EMPs were independent expert advisers when examining and reporting for the Benefits Agency. The court had considered that the fact that the tribunal had been required to consider and assess reports by other doctors who acted for the Benefits Agency did not raise concerns of impartiality. The issue to be determined was whether or not the test for apparent bias was satisfied.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that the common law test to be applied was whether the fair minded and informed observer, having considered the facts, would have concluded that there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased, _[Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, [2002] 2 A.C. 357, [2001] 12 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I23D2C010E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=df772e351b564fcca539b70451aaa8d3&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied. The facts did not support the argument that X was to be seen as a Benefits Agency doctor or that she was in some other way aligned with the Benefits Agency. Her relationship with the Benefits Agency was as an independent expert adviser and there was no basis for a finding of reasonable apprehension of bias on the ground that X had a predisposition to favour the Benefits Agency. A fair minded and informed observer would have appreciated that professional detachment and an ability to exercise her own judgment on medical issues were at the centre of her relationship with the Agency, and that X was just as capable of exercising those qualities when sitting as the medical member of a disability appeal tribunal. Neither was there any basis on the evidence for the contention that X was likely to be unconsciously biased in favour of the report of the EMP simply because she had a special interest in and experience of the preparation of EMP reports. X's experience of working as an EMP was likely to have benefited her and the other tribunal members when she was evaluating the EMP report, _[R. (on the application of PD) v West Midlands and North West Mental Health Review Tribunal [2004] EWCA Civ 311, [2004] M.H.L.R. 174, [2004] 3 WLUK 483](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7EB35E40E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=df772e351b564fcca539b70451aaa8d3&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied.