The section 44 power allowed a senior police officer to grant a stop and search authorisation for a designated area when it was considered ‘expedient’ to do so for the prevention of acts of terrorism. The two applicants had been stopped and searched outside an arms fair at the Excel Centre in London.

The ECtHR held that this power was accompanied by inadequate safeguards against arbitrary interference with rights. The word ‘expedient’ in s. 44 of the Act meant no more than ‘advantageous’ or ‘helpful’. The authorisation did not even have to be considered necessary for preventing acts of terrorism. Authorisations had been made for London on a rolling basis ever since the power was first granted. Once granted, officers could stop and search people purely on the basis of a hunch or intuition. There was no need for that officer to suspect anything about the person who was stopped, let alone to have any objective basis for that suspicion.

Thousands of people had been searched under this power. Arrests had been made for other crimes as a result, but none relating to a terrorism offence. Statistics also showed that black and Asian persons were disproportionately subject to searches under these authorisations. The law, under which the searches had been carried out, did not therefore meet the standard required (under article 8) in relation to the Sunday Times test.

---

### Summary

Police powers under anti-terrorism legislation that authorised, and provided a wide discretion to execute, the stop and search of individuals in public without the need for reasonable suspicion of wrongdoing were neither sufficiently circumscribed nor subject to adequate legal safeguards against abuse, and violated the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Abstract

The complainants (G and Q) complained that their having been stopped and searched by the police under the [Terrorism Act 2000 s.44](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DEAD3E0E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default)) violated their right to respect for their private life under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default)).

G had been stopped on his way to joining a demonstration against an arms fair. He was detained for 20 minutes and searched. Q was a journalist who was going to film the protest. She was detained for half an hour, searched and told to stop filming. The High Court dismissed their application for judicial review of the stop-and-search powers used against them. The Court of Appeal and the House of Lords dismissed their appeals.

### Held

Complaints upheld.

(1) The use of the coercive powers conferred by the 2000 Act to require an individual to submit to a detailed search of his person, his clothing and his personal belongings amounted to a clear interference with the right to respect for private life. Although the search was undertaken in a public place that did not mean that art.8 was inapplicable. Indeed, the public nature of the search might, in certain cases, compound the seriousness of the interference because of an element of humiliation and embarrassment. Items such as bags, wallets, notebooks and diaries could, moreover, contain personal information which the owner might feel uncomfortable about having exposed to the view of his companions or the wider public. Accordingly, the searching of G and Q constituted an interference with their right to respect for private life. 

(2) Such an interference could only be justified under art.8(2) if it was, among other things, in accordance with the law, _[Liberty v United Kingdom (58243/00) (2009) 48 E.H.R.R. 1, [2008] 7 WLUK 25](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3E662F304FD711DDB3B2E535D50CA772/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. To be in accordance with the law, the impugned measure had to have some basis in domestic law and also be compatible with the rule of law. The domestic law had thus to be adequately accessible and foreseeable, and to meet those requirements it had to afford a measure of legal protection against arbitrary interferences by public authorities with the rights safeguarded by the Convention. In matters affecting fundamental rights it would be contrary to the rule of law for a legal discretion granted to the executive to be expressed in terms of an unfettered power. Consequently, the law had to indicate with sufficient clarity the scope of any such discretion conferred on the competent authorities and the manner of its exercise, _[Rotaru v Romania (28341/95) 8 B.H.R.C. 449, [2000] 5 WLUK 77](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8170FFC0E4B911DAB61499BEED25CD3B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Hasan v Bulgaria (30985/96) (2002) 34 E.H.R.R. 55, [2000] 10 WLUK 735](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBB3F8291E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Maestri v Italy (39748/98) (2004) 39 E.H.R.R. 38, [2004] 2 WLUK 439](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IECFE09A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de705ab69b4a422883c0cbca43e47b15&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The power in question in the instant case had a basis in domestic law, namely s.44 to s.47 of the 2000 Act. However, the safeguards provided by domestic law had not been demonstrated to constitute a real curb on the wide powers afforded to the executive so as to offer the individual adequate protection against arbitrary interference. Of particular concern was the breadth of the discretion conferred on the individual police officer. The officer's decision to stop and search would be based exclusively on his professional intuition. Not only was it unnecessary for him to demonstrate the existence of any reasonable suspicion, he was not required even subjectively to suspect anything about the person stopped and searched. There was a clear risk of arbitrariness in the grant of such a broad discretion to the police officer. The powers were not therefore in accordance with the law and it followed that there had been a violation of art.8.
