### Summary

The extradition of the parents of six young children to the United States to face drugs charges was not incompatible with either their rights or the rights of their children under the [European Convention on Human Rights art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)). The children's art.8 rights were outweighed by the overwhelming public interest in giving effect to the extradition request.

### Abstract

The appellants (H and W) each appealed against a decision of the High Court of Justiciary (_[[2011] HCJAC 77, 2011 S.C.L. 978](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDC316670BEE811E0867A933E8A6AFB33/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default))_) upholding an order for their extradition to the United States.

H and W were a married couple who had been living in Scotland with their six children, four of whom were under 10. All the children had been placed on the child protection register as a result of allegations that H had sexually abused other children. The US had requested H and W's extradition on charges of conspiracy and the unlawful importation of chemicals used to manufacture methamphetamine. A sustained and deliberate course of unlawful conduct was alleged and the charges were serious, punishable by substantial terms of imprisonment. 

H and W fought the extradition application on the basis that it would lead to the breakdown of the family and would be incompatible with their rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)). The sheriff rejected that argument and sent the case to the Scottish Ministers, who ordered H and W's extradition. The High Court of Justiciary rejected H and W's appeals. By that time, W had ended her relationship with H and the two eldest children were reluctant to see him. The issues were 
(i) whether the appeals were competent; 
(ii) whether the children's art.8 rights were outweighed by the strength of any other considerations.

### Held

Appeals dismissed.

(1) The appeals were competent. There was no appeal to the instant court from a decision of the High Court of Justiciary under the [Extradition Act 2003 s.103](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICCB70A90E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)). However, the question of whether H and W's extradition was compatible with art.8, and thus whether the Scottish Ministers had the power under the [Scotland Act 1998 s.57(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2004C521E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)) to order it, was a devolution issue within the meaning of [Sch.6 para.1(d)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2CB9C660E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1998 Act. [Section 116](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICCBD9A40E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 2003 Act did not exclude the right of appeal to the Supreme Court on a devolution issue and in those circumstances an appeal lay to the instant court under [Sch.6 para.13](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2CC18E90E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1998 Act (see paras [4, 24-34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The reasoning in _[ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4, [2011] 2 A.C. 166, [2011] 2 WLUK 49](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB446D0402E6111E0A028EB79930361B2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default))_, though concerned with deportation rather than extradition, was relevant to how issues about the rights of children should be dealt with in the context of an application for their parents' extradition, ZH applied. Extradition cases did not fall into a special category which diminished the need to examine carefully the way the process would interfere with the individual's right to respect for his family life. The approach to art.8 rights in extradition cases was not radically different from that adopted in deportation or expulsion cases. In both types of case great weight had to be given to the public interest in giving effect to a request for extradition: the more serious the offence, the greater the weight. Where the family life of children was involved, their best interests were a primary consideration and the question was whether their art.8 rights were outweighed by the strength of any other considerations. While that was the starting point, it did not mean that the decision-maker had to examine the interests of the children at the very beginning of the exercise, _[R. (on the application of HH) v Westminster City Magistrates' Court [2012] UKSC 25, [2013] 1 A.C. 338, [2012] 6 WLUK 423](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC994A6D0BACD11E19D62CDA71F36093D/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. It simply ensured that the best interests principle was not seen as having a reduced importance when there were other important compelling considerations that had to be respected (paras [47-50](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) In the instant case there was the prospect of H and W being kept apart from their children and, perhaps, the children from each other for a very long time. The children's family relationship with H had effectively come to an end, and the prospect of their ever resuming family life together was remote. The argument that it would be contrary to their best interests for him to be extradited was very weak, while the treaty obligation requiring effect to be given to the extradition request was compelling. H's appeal therefore failed (paras [52-55](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) W's case was more difficult. There was no doubt that it was in the children's best interests to continue to live with her, but were she to be extradited then there was a risk that they would be taken into care. Cases such as the instant one, where the parents of young children were both at risk of being extradited, were so exceptional as to require the court to be satisfied that the interests of justice could not equally well be served by prosecuting H and W in the United Kingdom, _[Norris v United States [2010] UKSC 9, [2010] 2 A.C. 487, [2010] 2 WLUK 676](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69D7AE70217F11DF9FAECEB7E89FC86E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=590842db29db4fca91d2c3f1dcc8a760&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. 

The issue was one of proportionality: the more compelling the interests of the children, the more important it would be for the alternatives to extradition to be carefully examined. In the circumstances, it would not be appropriate for H and W to be tried in the UK; the proper forum was the US. The children's best interests, even taken together with W's own art.8 right, were not strong enough to overcome the overwhelming public interest in giving effect to the extradition request. The order for W's extradition was therefore not incompatible with her Convention rights and her appeal also failed (paras [56-60, 65, 70-71-72](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).