### Summary

The Supreme Court set out the content of the proportionality review that was required by the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)) where possession proceedings were brought against an introductory tenant or a homeless person.

### Abstract

In conjoined appeals against decisions relating to possession proceedings brought against two individuals occupying premises under introductory tenancies and against a person who had been granted a licence to occupy a property under the homelessness regime in the [Housing Act 1996 Pt VII](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I296C8CA1E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)), the court was asked to determine certain issues.

The issues were (i) the content of the proportionality review required by the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)) where possession was sought against an introductory tenant or a homeless person; (ii) whether [s.127(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I29361350E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1996 Act could be read compatibly with the introductory tenant's art.8 right so as to allow him to defend a claim for possession on the grounds recognised in _[Manchester City Council v Pinnock [2010] UKSC 45, [2011] 2 A.C. 104, [2010] 11 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEFCA0C10E7BF11DFBC37FCFFDDF37BFC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default))_; (iii) whether the court could defer the delivery of possession for a period in excess of the maximum permitted by the [Housing Act 1980 s.89](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE62B3DB0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)) if it considered that it would be proportionate to do so.

### Held

Judgment accordingly.

(1) (Per Lord Hope) There was nothing in the statutory schemes which prevented the court from refusing to make an order for possession if it considered that it would not be proportionate to do so. In the ordinary case, the relevant facts would be encapsulated entirely in the two legitimate aims that were identified in Pinnock, namely vindicating the local authority's ownership rights and enabling it to comply with its public duties in relation to the allocation and management of its housing stock. It was against those aims, which should always be taken for granted, that the court had to weigh up any factual objections that might be raised by the defendant and what he had to say about his personal circumstances. Only if a defence was put forward that was seriously arguable would it be necessary to adjourn the case for further consideration of the issues of lawfulness or proportionality. If that test was not met, the order for possession should be granted. The threshold for raising an arguable case on proportionality was a high one which would be reached in only a small proportion of cases (see paras [34-45](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (Per Lord Phillips) In homelessness cases, while there was no burden on a local authority, in the first instance, to justify to the court its application for a possession order or to plead the reason for seeking such an order, the tenant had to be informed of the reason for the authority's action so that he could, if so minded, attempt to raise a proportionality challenge (para.[116](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) (Per Lord Hope) On the face of it, the court had no discretion under s.127(2) as to whether or not it should make an order for possession against an introductory tenant. However, in Pinnock, which involved a demoted tenant, the court held that, as lawfulness had to be an inherent requirement of the procedure for seeking a possession order, it had equally to be open to the court to consider whether that procedure had been lawfully followed having regard to the defendant's art.8 rights. It was by that route, and by the application of the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.3(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B25DFF0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.7(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)), that the court held that [s.143D(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I29422141E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb985ae9acab4565a036768c5ba4c06b&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1996 Act could be read and given effect to enable the judge to deal with a defence that relied on an alleged breach of the defendant's rights under art.8. There was a sufficient similarity between s.127(2) and s.143D(2) to apply the reasoning in Pinnock to introductory tenancies also, Pinnock applied (paras [51, 56](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) (Per Lord Hope) The effect of s.89(1) of the 1980 Act was to remove from the court the discretion which it had at common law to select whatever length of postponement it thought fit. However, s.89 did not take away from the court its ordinary powers of case management. It would be perfectly proper for it, for example, to defer making the order for possession pending an appeal or to enable proceedings to be brought in the Administrative Court. An adjournment would also be a permissible exercise of the court's discretion (paras [58, 63](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).