The Court of Appeal held that a deportation notice that did not specify the country to which JN would be deported, as required by the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003, did not invalidate the decision to deport him. The purpose of the requirement was to assist the person concerned in relation to any appeal, and JN's ability to present his appeal was not impaired by the omission, particularly where it was clear from the decision reasons that the intention was to deport him to Cameroon.

---

### Summary

The [Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6AACF8C0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not condition the exercise of the secretary of state's decision-making power under the [Immigration Act 1971 s.5(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D5E4B80E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default)), and it was impossible for non-compliance with a requirement in the Regulations to affect the validity of a decision made under the Act.

### Abstract

The appellant (J) appealed against a decision of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal to uphold the respondent secretary of state's order for his deportation.

J was a Cameroon national and had entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2000. He was arrested and convicted of possession of a false passport when returning to the UK from a trip to Cameroon in 2006, and a recommendation was made that he be deported. The secretary of state issued a notice of a decision to make a deportation order under the [Immigration Act 1971 s.5(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D5E4B80E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default)), which did not specify the country to which J would be deported, although a letter giving reasons for the decision made reference to Cameroon. J's appeal against the decision was dismissed by the AIT, on the basis that there was no dispute as to the country to which he was to be deported and that reference had been made to Cameroon in the letter. On reconsideration, the second AIT found that there had been no material error of law in the original decision.

J submitted that the omission to state the country of removal had invalidated the notice and the decision, and the AIT had therefore lacked jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) It was important to distinguish between the notice and the decision to make a deportation order. The order required J to leave the UK, and prohibited him from re-entering, and there was no statutory requirement that such a decision or order should state a proposed country of destination. There was also no requirement regarding the content of a notice of such a decision. The secretary of state was empowered, under the [Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 s.105](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I55D032D0E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default)), to make regulations which provided that written notice containing certain provisions might be given, but no duty was imposed to make regulations, and the content of any regulations made was not prescribed. The [Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6AACF8C0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not therefore condition the exercise of the secretary of state's decision-making power under s.5(1) of the 1971 Act, and it was impossible for non-compliance with a requirement in the Regulations to affect the validity of a decision made under that Act. 

(2) Even if the Regulations did condition the exercise of the secretary of state's decision-making power, non-compliance would not have invalidated the decision. The statement of destination in a notice was no more than a proposal. The essential purpose of the requirement under [reg.5(1)(b)(i)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8819AAE0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default)) to state the proposed destination in a notice was to assist the person concerned in relation to any appeal process, _[MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 4, [2009] Imm. A.R. 413, [2009] 1 WLUK 155](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9D64C1F0E38311DD84A093E4FDA4CD24/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[MS (Palestinian Territories) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 17, [2009] Imm. A.R. 464, [2009] 1 WLUK 409](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I97611DA0E9CB11DD9BABCCD9CA1BF095/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[KF v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKIAT 109, [2005] Imm. A.R. 458, [2005] 6 WLUK 77](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6CCBE680E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ doubted. The proposed destination for J's removal had been clear throughout, and his ability to present his appeal was not impaired in any way by the failure to state the destination in the notice. Non-compliance was not intended in those circumstances to result in invalidity of either the notice or the decision and was no more than a technicality which had no effect on the AIT's jurisdiction, _[R. v Soneji (Kamlesh Kumar) [2005] UKHL 49, [2006] 1 A.C. 340, [2005] 7 WLUK 669](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6A674AF0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a84f943baf1b489993760e2d81cd4c1f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. 

(3) (Obiter) Even if the proposed destination had been unclear and had not been clarified in the course of the appeal process, that would not have resulted in invalidity of the notice or decision. Instead, it would have meant that the person concerned had not had an effective opportunity to present his case under the relevant Conventions related to any specific country of removal. When it came to the making of removal directions to a specific destination, he would be in a position to challenge those directions without it being said that his rights had been exhausted by the previous appeal process.