### Summary

The UK Government was not obliged to hold a public inquiry into the deaths of 24 civilians killed by British soldiers in colonial Malaya in 1948. The lapse of time meant that there was no requirement to hold an inquiry under [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default)). Further, such a duty could not be implied into common law under principles of customary international law and the decision not to hold an inquiry under the [Inquiries Act 2005 s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I720CF040E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default)) was not open to challenge on judicial review principles.

### Abstract

The appellants (K) appealed against a decision (_[[2014] EWCA Civ 312, [2015] Q.B. 57](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I109617C0AF6011E382B5E9FB60B276D2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the respondent secretaries of state were not required to hold a public inquiry into the deaths of 24 unarmed civilians killed by British soldiers in colonial Malaya in 1948. The secretaries of state cross-appealed on the basis that the claim was outside the jurisdiction of the UK courts.

The British soldiers had been sent to Malaya to combat an insurgency. Shortly after the incident, an official report stated that the civilians who were killed were detained bandits who had been trying to escape. K were witnesses and relatives of the deceased. They alleged that the civilians had been deliberately executed. The secretaries of state refused K's requests for an inquiry into the killings. The issues were whether (i) the UK courts had jurisdiction to determine the claim; (ii) an inquiry was required under [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default)); (iii) the secretaries of state had a duty to investigate under customary international law; (iv) the decision not to order an inquiry under the [Inquiries Act 2005](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5D1BEB30E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default)) could be challenged by judicial review.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(Lady Hale dissenting) 

(1) It was not open to the secretaries of state to assert that the acts of the British soldiers were not attributable to the UK. While on active service in Malaya, the soldiers remained under the command of the Crown. There was no question of their secondment to any other authority. The secretaries of state could not argue that any liabilities of the Crown had passed to the Federation of Malaya when it became independent in 1957. Even if responsibility for the deaths had transferred to the Federation under the Federal Constitution of 1957, that could not affect any domestic law duty which the UK would otherwise have towards victims of prior misconduct by the British army. The general rule was that state liability for a death remained with the state responsible for the deaths and did not pass to a state which took over the relevant territory or activities (see paras [178, 187-197](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) (Lord Kerr and Lady Hale agreeing that the art.2 claim should fail but dissenting in relation to when the critical date was) The ECHR did not bind a contracting party in relation to any act or fact which took place before the ECHR had entered into force with respect to that party (the "critical date"). However, according to the principles set out in _[Janowiec v Russia (55508/07) (2014) 58 E.H.R.R. 30, [2013] 10 WLUK 638](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICD4E3680BBFA11E38AE0E8224CAFEDC2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default))_ a duty to investigate could arise under art.2 where two criteria were satisfied. In the instant case, the first criterion was satisfied: there had been relevant "acts or omissions" after the critical date because there had been no full or public investigation of the killings and compelling evidence had come to light suggesting that they were unlawful. However, the second criterion had not been satisfied: there was no "genuine connection" between the deaths and the critical date. The critical date was 1966, when the UK first recognised the right to petition the European Court of Human Rights, rather than 1953 when the ECHR came into force in the UK. The killings occurred more than 10 years before the critical date and there was therefore no genuine connection, Janowiec_[Silih v Slovenia (71463/01) (2009) 49 E.H.R.R. 37, [2009] 4 WLUK 274](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I967874B0B93711DE9D75CCA7968CE3E6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Varnava v Turkey (16064/90) (2010) 50 E.H.R.R. 21, [2008] 1 WLUK 65](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE047E9C016C211DF970C9D47B1B6D882/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The claim under art.2 had to fail (paras [70-87](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) By 1948, it had not been established that international law required a formal public investigation into a suspicious death, even if there were strong reasons for believing that a war crime had been committed. Even if such a duty had been imposed by customary international law, it had to be subject to a cut-off date and it was inconceivable that it could be treated as retrospective to events which occurred more than 40 years earlier. In any event, if international law did require such an investigation, that requirement could not be implied into the common law. Parliament had expressly provided for investigations into deaths through the coroners' courts and through the 2005 Act. It had also incorporated art.2 through the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default)). In those circumstances, it would be inappropriate for the courts to impose a further duty to hold an inquiry, particularly with such potentially wide and uncertain ramifications, _[McKerr's Application for Judicial Review, Re [2004] UKHL 12, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 807, [2004] 3 WLUK 321](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF64845C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [112-122](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) (Lady Hale dissenting) In exercising their statutory discretion under [s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I720CF040E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fa7fc090e63a40d282723c7799c1be67&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 2005 Act, the secretaries of state had clearly considered the request for an inquiry seriously and had rejected it for defensible and relevant reasons. It was impossible to characterise their conclusion as unreasonable or irrational. The decision could not be impugned. It was not appropriate to determine K's arguments that the time had come to recognise proportionality, rather than rationality, as a basis for challenging administrative decisions. The issue had potentially profound and wide implications and would need to be argued before a panel of nine Justices. However, such a course was unnecessary because the appeal would fail even if it was based on proportionality (paras [127-129, 132](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (Per Lady Hale) The decision not to hold an inquiry was not one which a reasonable authority could have reached. The secretaries of state had not taken account of all the possible purposes and benefits of such an inquiry. The value of establishing the truth was overwhelming (paras [309-313](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).