### Summary

In the circumstances, the domestic law at the relevant time had not indicated with sufficient clarity, so as to provide adequate protection against abuse of power, the scope or manner of exercise of the very wide discretion conferred on the state to intercept and examine external communications. In particular, it had not set out in a form accessible to the public any indication of the procedure to be followed for examining, sharing, storing and destroying intercepted material.

### Abstract

The complainants (C) complained under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=21fe89707fb84aaabb571bf555bb4d1a&contextData=(sc.Default)) about the interception of their communications. According to C the British Ministry of Defence had operated an electronic test facility and that facility had, between 1990 and 1997, intercepted their telephone, facsimile, e-mail and data communications, including legally privileged and confidential information. C had complained to the Interception of Communications Tribunal, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Investigatory Powers Tribunal about the alleged unlawful interception of their communications. However the complaints were dismissed on the basis that there had been no contravention of the [Interception of Communications Act 1985](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I601750E0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=21fe89707fb84aaabb571bf555bb4d1a&contextData=(sc.Default)). The issues were whether (i) there had been an interference with the rights of C under art.8; (ii) the interference was in accordance with the law.

### Held

Complaint upheld.

(1) The court recalled that the existence of legislation that allowed a system for the secret monitoring of communications entailed a threat of surveillance for all those to whom the legislation might be applied. Accordingly, there had been an interference with the rights of C under art.8. 

(2) Section 3(2) of the 1985 Act allowed the authorities extremely broad discretion to intercept communications between the United Kingdom and an external receiver. There was no limit to the type of external communications that could be included in a warrant under [s.3(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I90373160E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=21fe89707fb84aaabb571bf555bb4d1a&contextData=(sc.Default)). The discretion was virtually unfettered. The state had accepted that, in principle, any person who sent or received any form of telecommunication outside the British Islands during the period in question could have had their communication physically intercepted under a s.3(2) warrant. Although the state maintained that during the relevant period there had been internal regulations, manuals and instructions applying to the processes of selection for examination, dissemination and storage of intercepted material, which provided a safeguard against abuse of power, the details of those arrangements made under s.6 of the 1985 Act were not contained in legislation or otherwise made available to the public. In the state, extensive extracts from the Interception of Communications Code of Practice were in the public domain, which suggested that it was possible for the state to make public certain details about the operation of a scheme of external surveillance without compromising national security. In the circumstances, the domestic law at the relevant time had not indicated with sufficient clarity, so as to provide adequate protection against abuse of power, the scope or manner of exercise of the very wide discretion conferred on the state to intercept and examine external communications. In particular, it had not set out in a form accessible to the public any indication of the procedure to be followed for examining, sharing, storing and destroying intercepted material. The interference with the rights of C was not in in accordance with the law. Accordingly, art.8 had been violated. 

(3) C were awarded €7,500 for costs and expenses.