A district auditor issued a certificate against councillors for wilful misconduct in not setting a rate. His failure to offer them an oral hearing, when they had made full written representations, and had not requested an oral hearing, did not make his decision open to challenge at law. The District Auditor drew the attention of the Liverpool City Councillors to their failure to make a rate, warning them of the possible consequences for them financially and by way of disqualification. The council did not make a rate until June 14, 1985, after two warnings. He notified them on June 26, 1985, that he was considering certifying the sum of GBP 106,103 consequent on their failure to make a rate, on the ground that the loss was caused by their wilful default. They were invited to make written representations on the concerns the auditor had. The councillors made a detailed written rebuttal of the auditor's points, but did not request an oral hearing. On September 6, the auditor certified the sum of GBP 106,103 as due from them, jointly and severally, owing to their wilful misconduct, under the [Local Government Finance Act 1982 s.20(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0087CE0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=42b6190759844c4793db2510266baf27&contextData=(sc.Default)). They appealed against the notice under s.20(3) but their claim was dismissed at all stages.

Held, that in all the circumstances including the fact that they had not requested an oral hearing and that they had been able to make full written representations, the auditor had not acted unfairly in not affording them an oral hearing and they had not been prejudiced by his failure to do so. They had had adequate notice of the matters on which the auditor had relied in issuing his certificate, and he and the courts below had been entitled to conclude that the loss was caused by their wilful misconduct. Per curiam: The appeal mechanism provided by s.20(3) of the 1982 Act is apt to enable the court in its discretion, notwithstanding that it finds some procedural defect in the conduct of an audit that has resulted in a certificate based on wilful misconduct, to inquire into the merits of the case and arrive at its own decision thereon.