### Summary

The secretary of state had acted unlawfully in refusing an application for leave to remain on the grounds that bank statements provided by the applicant showed that he had held sufficient funds for a period of 22 consecutive days rather than the 28 days required by the Immigration Rules. Properly interpreted, the secretary of state's instructions to caseworkers obliged them first to have invited the applicant to repair the deficit in his evidence.

### Abstract

An applicant for leave to remain (M) appealed against a decision (_[[2014] EWCA Civ 2, [2014] Imm. A.R. 588](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICE227130823811E3A0FBEF8EE4285194/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e4144685f3cf4033af2d933cf79ceffd&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the secretary of state had not acted unlawfully in refusing his application without first inviting him to supply further documents.

M was a foreign student. He applied to the UK Border Agency for an extension of his leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student under the points-based system. The Immigration Rules required that an application had to be accompanied, as evidence of the applicant's ability to maintain himself, by bank statements showing that he had held at least £5,400 for a period of 28 consecutive days ending no earlier than a month before the date of the application. M provided a bank statement, numbered statement 64, which showed that he had held that sum for 22 consecutive days. Statements 62 and 63 would have shown that he had also held the money for the previous six days. The UKBA refused his application on the ground that he had failed to demonstrate that he had held the money for the full 28 days. The UKBA had previously issued a process instruction to its caseworkers regarding evidential flexibility. It identified steps a caseworker was to take where an application had missing evidence, including inviting the applicant to provide missing documents. An example of missing documents was "bank statements missing from a series". The Court of Appeal held that statements 62 and 63 could not be said to have been "missing from a series" where only statement 64 had been submitted; it considered that it would have been speculation on the caseworker's part whether any statements would have shown the availability of funds, so the secretary of state had not been obliged to invite M to submit them.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

Interpreting the process instruction was a matter of law which the court had to decide for itself, _[R. (on the application of Kambadzi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 23, [2011] 1 W.L.R. 1299, [2011] 5 WLUK 728](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8789860086BE11E09D31E493DC8D20C4/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e4144685f3cf4033af2d933cf79ceffd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Previous suggestions that the courts should adopt the secretary of state's own interpretation of her immigration policies unless it was unreasonable were inaccurate, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Gangadeen [1998] 1 F.L.R. 762, [1997] 11 WLUK 520](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9104D1B0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e4144685f3cf4033af2d933cf79ceffd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled. The bank statements numbered 62, 63 and 64 formed a series. It must have been obvious to the caseworker, as he studied statement 64, that it formed the last in a series and that the statements which covered the preceding six days, which turned out to be statements 62 and 63, were missing from the series. It was not necessary for the caseworker to have had two ends of the series before he could conclude that something was missing from it, _[R. (on the application of Gu) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 1634 (Admin), [2015] 1 All E.R. 363, [2014] 5 WLUK 642](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I07FDFE60F2DC11E3947EA46B44C29463/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e4144685f3cf4033af2d933cf79ceffd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled. However, it was not the task of the caseworker even to do that. The process instruction had stressed the need for flexibility by telling him that there was no limit on the amount of information that could be requested, provided that the request was not speculative; that bank statements missing from a series represented only an example of the further evidence which should be requested; and that where there was uncertainty as to whether evidence existed, the applicant should be given the benefit of the doubt and it should be requested. Conferred with that necessary degree of flexibility, the caseworker could not have followed the process other than by requesting M to provide the statements which covered the first six of the 28 days. There would have been doubt, the benefit of which should have been given to M. The refusal of M's application had been unlawful because, properly interpreted, the process instruction obliged the UKBA first to have invited him to repair the deficit in his evidence (see paras [31-37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).