### Abstract

The sole condition precedent to the validity of an Act passed in the United Kingdom affecting a Dominion is that the Dominion has requested and consented to its enactment under the Statute of Westminster 1931 s.4; if the Act contains a declaration to that effect, it is conclusive. 

The Canada Act received the Royal Assent and came into force in 1982. The preamble to the Act contained a declaration that the Dominion of Canada had requested and consented to the Act within the provisions of s.4 of the Statute of Westminster 1931. The Canada Act enacted the Constitution Act 1982 which, on the one hand, affirmed the rights of Canadian Indians, and on the other, provided that the UK Parliament would take no part henceforward in amendments to the constitution of Canada. A number of Indian chiefs sought declarations in the English court to the effect that the UK Parliament had no power to amend the constitution of Canada so as to prejudice the Indians without their consent, and that the Canada Act 1982 was ultra vires. On the Attorney General's motion the court dismissed the statement of claim as showing no reasonable cause of action.

Held, dismissing P's appeal, that the sole condition precedent to the validity of an Act passed in the United Kingdom affecting a Dominion was that the Dominion had requested and consented to its enactment under the Statute of Westminster 1931. The preamble to the [Canada Act 1982 s.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I16C17160E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7905d67f4026410fa21a7079b8eaab4d&contextData=(sc.Default)) so stated, and that declaration was conclusive of s.4 and of the Act's validity (_[British Railways Board v Pickin [1974] A.C. 765, [1974] 1 WLUK 735](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7B736AF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7905d67f4026410fa21a7079b8eaab4d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Ellen Street Estates v Minister of Health [1934] 1 K.B. 590, [1934] 1 WLUK 63](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0E1C8E1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7905d67f4026410fa21a7079b8eaab4d&contextData=(sc.Default))_, dictum of Viscount Sankey L.C. in _[British Coal Corp v King, The [1935] A.C. 500, [1935] 6 WLUK 10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7AD50810E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7905d67f4026410fa21a7079b8eaab4d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Bribery Commissioner v Ranasinghe [1965] A.C. 172, [1964] 5 WLUK 10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7A4FF990E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7905d67f4026410fa21a7079b8eaab4d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).