### Abstract

M had appealed against a decision made by the Guernsey Island's Development Committee, refusing permission to permit residential use of his land. The appeal was dismissed. The Guernsey Royal Court Bailiff had previously sat in a non judicial capacity as President of the States of Deliberation, Guernsey's legislative body, when the draft development plan, which was directly applicable to M's land, was adopted.

M applied to the European Commission of Human Rights in 1995, and in 1998 the Commission opined that there had been a violation of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.6(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1FBD48E5924705BFBD5299078ED2BC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b22b2f0d6034f849d94a227a481b30b&contextData=(sc.Default)) and referred the matter to the European Court of Human Rights.

Held, granting the application, that whilst it was not suggested that the Bailiff had been subjectively biased when he had considered M's planning appeal in 1995, the concepts of independence and objective impartiality were relevant, _[Findlay v United Kingdom (22107/93) (1997) 24 E.H.R.R. 221, [1997] 2 WLUK 450](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA6B3A720E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b22b2f0d6034f849d94a227a481b30b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The question was whether the Bailiff possessed the required independence or objective impartiality required by the Convention. His direct involvement in the passage of legislation relevant to M's planning application cast doubt upon his judicial impartiality and independence, _[De Haan v Netherlands (1998) 26 E.H.R.R. 417, [1997] 8 WLUK 163](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I95AAFF00E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b22b2f0d6034f849d94a227a481b30b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved. M thus had legitimate reasons for assuming that the Bailiff's decision may have been influenced by his previous involvement in the legislative process, in breach of Art.6(1).