### Summary

An arrested person who had been charged with a scheduled offence had not been deprived of his right to liberty when the magistrate before whom he had appeared had had no power to release him on bail. On the facts, the case had been conducted with due expedition; the accused had been released three days after his arrest.

McKay was arrested on suspicion of robbery of a petrol station and detained for 36 hours before being brought before a magistrates’ court. The ECtHR held that, as the magistrate had the competence to examine the lawfulness of the arrest and detention, this provided satisfactory guarantees against abuse of power by the authorities and ensured compliance with article 5(3).

### Abstract

The complainant (M) alleged that his rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default)) had been breached by a refusal of bail.

M, who lived in Northern Ireland, was arrested on suspicion of robbery on January 7, 2001 and admitted the offence the following day. He was charged, and on January 8 instructed his solicitors to apply for bail. There was no objection from the police but bail was refused on the ground that the offence was a scheduled offence and, pursuant to the [Terrorism Act 2000 s.67(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID2B90B70E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the [Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1996 s.3(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IED2CF721E44E11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default)) , the magistrates did not have power to order release. M applied to the High Court on January 9 and was granted bail. He subsequently sought judicial review of the magistrates' decision to refuse bail, contending that the domestic law was incompatible with Art.5 of the Convention. His application was dismissed on the finding that there was no requirement in Art.5 that the court before which an arrested person was first brought should be the same court that had power to grant bail, and that M had been brought before the magistrates for a prompt automatic examination of the legal basis of his arrest and detention.

M argued that there was no justification for separating the power to review the lawfulness of detention from the power to grant bail, and that the magistrates' lack of power to grant bail was in breach of Art.5(3).

### Held

Complaint dismissed.

The key purpose of Art.5 was to prevent arbitrary or unjustified deprivations of liberty. Article 5(3) was concerned with (a) the initial period following arrest, and (b) the period pending trial. Those two limbs conferred rights which were distinct from one another, _[TW v Malta (2000) 29 E.H.R.R. 185, [1999] 4 WLUK 323](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF35F110E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. With regard to first limb, an arrested person was entitled to protection through judicial control which satisfied the requirements of promptness, an automatic review and an independent judicial officer having the power to order release after reviewing the justification for the arrest and detention, _[Assenov v Bulgaria (24760/94) (1999) 28 E.H.R.R. 652, [1998] 10 WLUK 489](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I67DE99B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[Schiesser v Switzerland (1979-80) 2 E.H.R.R. 417, [1979] 12 WLUK 30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I988A82D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. In the instant case, the magistrates had the competence to examine the lawfulness of M's arrest and detention and had the power to order release in the event of the arrest or detention being unlawful. That was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the first limb of Art.5(3). In terms of the second limb, there was a presumption in favour of release in the remand period and continued detention could only be justified if it was in the public interest, _[Kudla v Poland (30210/96) (2002) 35 E.H.R.R. 11, [2000] 10 WLUK 740](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID5826140E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Domestic courts were under an obligation to review the continued detention of persons pending trial with a view to ensuring release when the circumstances no longer justified continued deprivation of liberty. In the instant case, M's bail application had been granted within 24 hours of the magistrates' review of the lawfulness of his arrest and detention and the procedure had been conducted with due expedition. There was no requirement under the Convention that the two issues be dealt with by the same judicial officer, and in any event the examination of bail could not be required to take place any earlier than the time stipulated for the first automatic review, which was a maximum of four days, _[Brogan v United Kingdom (A/145-B) (1989) 11 E.H.R.R. 117, [1988] 11 WLUK 363](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7BCC3950E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=de01d79584a54eeebbb8e51250685346&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.