### Summary

The fact that the chairman of a tribunal, which was deciding whether the appellant former judge of the Supreme Court of Belize should be removed from office, belonged to the Bar Association of Belize, which itself had brought most of the complaints against the judge, did not lead to any possibility of bias. The chairman had played no part in the decisions that led to the complaints, and his membership of the Bar Association was compulsory because he was an attorney at law.

### Abstract

The appellant former justice of the Supreme Court of Belize (M), who had been removed from office following complaints of misbehaviour, appealed against a decision refusing reliefs sought by him, namely declarations that his rights under the Constitution of Belize s.3(a), s.6(1) and s.6(8) had been infringed and damages. M was removed from office by the Governor General on the advice of the Belize Advisory Council following complaints of misbehaviour in the office filed by the Bar Association of Belize and by an attorney in law. The Belize Advisory Council had convened as a tribunal to inquire into the complaints. At the outset of the hearing, M objected to the tribunal's decision to sit in camera but the tribunal ruled against that objection on the basis that s.6(8) did not apply. There was also an objection taken to the presence of the tribunal's chairman, who was a member of the Bar Association, which itself had made the majority of the complaints against M. The tribunal ruled against that objection on the basis that under the first proviso of s.54(11) of the Constitution it was mandatory for the chairman to preside over these proceedings. M argued that 

(1) the chairman should have recused himself either because he was automatically disqualified on the ground of apparent bias because he was a member of the Bar Association or because his membership gave rise to a reasonable suspicion of bias; 

(2) the requirement in s.54(11) that the chairman presided had to be construed subject to the protections set out in s.3(a) and s.6(1); and 

(3) the hearing into the allegations of misbehaviour, which had taken place in private, should have taken place in public for the purposes of s.6(8).

Held, dismissing the appeal, that 

(1) the principle of automatic disqualification did not apply in the instant case, _[R. v Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate Ex p. Pinochet Ugarte (No.2) [2000] 1 A.C. 119, [1999] 1 WLUK 487](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3429A460E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f203bb8903254c2587506cb6d04394ca&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Mere membership of an association by which proceedings were brought would not automatically disqualify the member sitting in the proceedings as a judge, but an active involvement in the institution of the particular proceedings would, _[Leeson v General Council of Medical Education and Registration (1889) 43 Ch. D. 366, [1889] 12 WLUK 71](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDFB61300E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f203bb8903254c2587506cb6d04394ca&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and Registration [1894] 1 Q.B. 750, [1894] 2 WLUK 91](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5D23B690E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f203bb8903254c2587506cb6d04394ca&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The chairman was a member of the Bar Association simply because it was compulsory as he was an attorney at law. It could not be said that simply because of his membership he could be identified in some way with the prosecution of the complaints that the Bar Association was presenting to the tribunal to mean that he was in effect acting as a judge in his own cause. The chairman had taken no part in the decisions that led to the making of the complaints and had no power to influence the decision either way as to whether they should be brought. In that situation his membership was in reality of no consequence. Taking into consideration, inter alia, the chairman's membership of the Bar Association and that s.54(11) directed the chairman to preside, a fair minded and informed observer, having considered the facts, would not consider that there was a real possibility that he was biased, _[Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, [2002] 2 A.C. 357, [2001] 12 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I23D2C010E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f203bb8903254c2587506cb6d04394ca&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. 

(2) It was within the contemplation of the framers of the Constitution that the chairman who was directed by the first proviso to s.54(11) to preside over an inquiry into the question of whether a judge of the Supreme Court should be removed for inability or misbehaviour would be a member of the Bar Association. It must also have been appreciated that the Bar Association would be concerned about, and involved in the presentation of, complaints alleging inability or misbehaviour on the part of a justice. This was a conclusive indication that mere membership of the association could not be taken on its own to be a ground for the chairman's disqualification. 

(3) The Belize Advisory Council was part of the executive not the judiciary. The functions conferred on it were not judicial functions of the kind contemplated by s.6(8) and it was self evident that it was not a "court" within the meaning of that subsection. It was also clear from the nature of its composition and functions that when it was conducting inquiries of the kind listed in s.54(11) it was not engaged in the determination of the existence of any civil right or obligation within the meaning of s.6(8). Accordingly s.6(8) did not apply where it was convened to discharge its duties under s.98 of the Constitution. Further it had not been demonstrated that M had suffered any unfairness as a result of the tribunal's decision to conduct the proceedings in camera.