One of the points raised in Miranda was that the powers used by the police, given in the Terrorism Act 2000, Sch 7, were not carried out for the purpose laid down in the statute, namely, to determine whether the person stopped and questioned was 'concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism’.

The claimant alleged that the dominant purpose of the stop was in fact to obtain access to the material that was believed to be held by him. This was rejected by the court, on what Laws LJ maintained was a proper construction of Schedule 7. This view was largely upheld by Lord Dyson MR in the Court of Appeal case: [2016] EWCA Civ 6.

---

### Summary

The purpose of the power to stop and question a person under the [Terrorism Act 2000 Sch.7 para.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID339FB41E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)) was to ascertain whether he appeared to be concerned in terrorism-related activities; examining officers were not required to have concluded that he appeared to be such a person before executing the stop.

### Abstract

The claimant (M) applied for judicial review of the actions of the Security Service and police force when they detained and questioned him, and removed his items.

M was a Brazilian citizen and the spouse of a journalist (G). G had been provided with encrypted data stolen from the American National Security Agency which included United Kingdom intelligence material. To assist G's journalistic activities, M travelled from Brazil to Germany, while carrying related encrypted material, to collect computer drives containing further material. The UK Security Service, using a post circulation sheet (PCS), requested that police officers stop M at the UK airport through which he was due to transfer on his return journey. Two further PCSs were sent, the final one requesting that M be examined under the [Terrorism Act 2000 Sch.7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID3398610E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)). Another note stated that a ports stop of M was the only way of mitigating the risk he posed to national security. M was stopped, pursuant to powers to stop and question a person at a port or border area to determine whether he appeared to be concerned in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism, pursuant to [Sch.7 para.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID339FB41E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.40(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID2A164C1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)). The court was required to determine whether (i) the power under Sch.7 para.2(1) allowed the police to stop M; (ii) the power was disproportionate to any legitimate aim; (iii) the power under Sch.7 para.2(1) was compatible with the right to freedom of expression under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE7756732A7B4BBC93274BDE4496FB0F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Held

Application refused.

(1) (a) In deciding whether the statutory purpose was made out, the court was not limited to considering the examining officers' subjective state of mind. Given the context, namely the possible apprehension of terrorism, Parliament must have enacted Sch.7 in the knowledge that there might be very good reasons why the examining officers should not be privy to the whole story. The primary evidence for determining the stop's purpose was likely to be the terms of the instructions given to the examining officers, in the instant case the last PCS. However, it was important that the court should have some evidence of the hierarchy of decision-making behind and above the PCS; and there might be cases where there was no PCS. In the instant case, given the reliance on it by successive levels of authorisation, the purpose of the stop could be gleaned from the last PCS, considered in light of the national security justification. The purpose was to ascertain the nature of the material which M was carrying and, if on examination it proved to be as feared, to neutralise the effects of its release, or further release, or dissemination (see paras [21-23, 26-27](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment); 

(b) [Section 1(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID281F5E0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)) defined the categories of action whose use or public threat might constitute terrorism; it did not impose any accompanying mental element. Similarly, the expression "concerned in" in s.40(1)(b) was not to be taken to import the criteria for guilt as a secondary party which the criminal law required in a case of joint enterprise. Schedule 7 did not require that the examining officers have any grounds for suspecting that a person fell within s.40(1)(b). They also were not required to have concluded before executing the stop that the person appeared to fall within s.40(1)(b). The power's purpose was to ascertain whether he so appeared. However, the general law required that the power be exercised on some reasoned basis, proportionately and in good faith. There was a limitation on the meaning of terrorism given by reference to the mental or purposive elements under [s.1(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID281F5E0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.1(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID281F5E0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default)). The power might only be used in certain circumstances and detention was limited to nine hours. It appeared that the Sch.7 power was given to provide a reasonable but limited opportunity for the ascertainment of a possibility that a traveller at a port might be involved in any of a range of activities enumerated in s.1(2). The s.1 definition of terrorism was capable of covering the publication or threatened publication of stolen classified information which, if published, would reveal personal details of members of the armed forces or security and intelligence agencies, thereby endangering their lives, where that publication or threatened publication was designed to influence government policy on the activities of the security and intelligence agencies. The purpose of the stop fell properly within Sch.7 (paras [29-36](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) A journalist enjoyed heightened protection only for the sake of the readers or his audience. Where journalistic freedom was involved, the balance was not between private right and public interest, but between two aspects of the public interest. Journalists had a professional responsibility to take care, so far as they were able, to see that the public interest, including state security and the lives of other people, was not endangered by what they published. However, that was not an adequate safeguard for lives and security. The Sch.7 stop was a proportionate measure. Its objective was legitimate and very pressing (paras [46, 65, 71, 73](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) Schedule 7 was not over-broad or arbitrary and was prescribed by law, in compliance with art.10 of the Convention, _[Beghal v DPP [2013] EWHC 2573 (Admin), [2014] Q.B. 607, [2013] 8 WLUK 300](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICC59FF70103811E398D8D7BAC49354FE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee82362f7ce74355bf0c02a0b0b87129&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (para.[82](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).