### Summary

A hospital trust sought a declaration that it was entitled to discontinue the administration of artificial hydration and nutrition to a patient in a persistent vegetative state. The court held that where, as in the instant case, the continuation of treatment was not in the best interests of a patient, action to discontinue treatment would not constitute an intentional deprivation of life pursuant to the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.2(1) since the case was not one in which there was an obligation upon the state to take steps to prolong life. Neither would withdrawal of treatment breach the requirement within Art.2 to take adequate and appropriate steps to safeguard life since such an obligation was not absolute but was dependent upon the circumstances. Article 3 was of no application given the fact that the patient would be unaware of the withdrawal of treatment.

### Abstract

A hospital trust sought a declaration that it was entitled to discontinue the administration of artificial hydration and nutrition to M, a patient in a persistent vegetative state. M had been diagnosed as being in a permanent vegetative state in 1997 after having suffered anoxic brain damage and the trust submitted that it would not be in her best interests to continue the treatment.

Held, granting the declaration, that where the continuation of treatment was no longer in the best interests of a patient, action to discontinue that treatment would not constitute an intentional deprivation of life pursuant to the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9ef18f41efb04c65a06c321040da5119&contextData=(sc.Default)). It followed that in the instant case there was no obligation on the state to prolong M's life, _[Airedale NHS Trust v Bland [1993] A.C. 789, [1993] 2 WLUK 69](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I53F1E471E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9ef18f41efb04c65a06c321040da5119&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Furthermore, the withdrawal of treatment would not breach the requirement contained in Art.2 to take adequate and appropriate steps to safeguard life as the positive obligation upon a state to protect life was not an absolute obligation to treat a patient if that treatment would be futile, _[Osman v United Kingdom (23452/94) [1999] 1 F.L.R. 193, [1998] 10 WLUK 513](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I14AEDD80E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9ef18f41efb04c65a06c321040da5119&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Moreover, Art.3, prohibiting torture, was inapplicable as it required the victim to be aware of the inhuman and degrading treatment and, in the instant case, M, as an insensate patient who had been in a persistent vegetative state for in excess of three years, was unaware of the treatment and would also be unaware of its withdrawal.