### Abstract

Where a plaintiff complains of an infringement of his public law rights he must as a general rule, proceed by way of application for judicial review and not by way of declaratory action. 

Per curiam: in all proceedings for judicial review started since 1977 the grant of leave to cross-examine deponents is governed by the same principles as it is in actions begun by originating summons: it should be allowed whenever the justices of the particular case so requires. The four plaintiffs were prisoners in Hull Prison. They were charged with disciplinary offences before the Board of Visitors which found the charges proved in each case and imposed penalties. Three of the plaintiffs brought actions by writ in the Queen's Bench Division against the Board alleging that it had acted in breach of the Prison Rules and the rules of natural justice and claiming a declaration that the board's findings were void. The fourth plaintiff started similar proceedings in the Chancery Division. 

The defendants in all four cases applied to strike out the proceedings, and the judge dismissed the applications. His decision was reversed by the Court of Appeal which struck out the proceedings on the ground that they were an abuse of the process of the court and that the plaintiffs' only proper remedy was by way of judicial review under the [Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.53](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I94D860C0E4AB11DA9407CBB86AE37856/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6787053890b047988e0663f4d4342c27&contextData=(sc.Default)) .

Held, dismissing their appeal, that since all remedies for the infringement of rights protected by public law could be obtained on an application for judicial review, as a general rule, it would be contrary to public policy and an abuse of the process of the court for a plaintiff complaining of a public authority's infringement of his public law rights to seek redress by ordinary action. Accordingly it was an abuse of the court to allow the actions to proceed and thereby avoid the protection afforded to statutory tribunals ( _[R. v Board of Visitors of Hull Prison Ex p. St Germain (No.1) [1979] Q.B. 425, [1978] 10 WLUK 19](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I33F749C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6787053890b047988e0663f4d4342c27&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved).