In _Oakley,_ the local authority granted planning permission for Cambridge City Football Club to build a new stadium on an area of ‘green belt’ land, contrary to a recommendation by the council’s senior planning officer. No reasons were provided. In his judgment, Elias LJ provided a rationale and set of principles for the need to give reasons in such cases:
> ‘There are powerful reasons why it is desirable for administrative bodies to give reasons for their decisions. They include improving the quality of decisions by focusing the mind of the decision-making body…; promoting public confidence in the decision-making process; providing, or at least facilitating, the opportunity for those affected to consider whether the decision was lawfully reached…; and respecting the individual's interest in understanding – and perhaps thereby more readily accepting – why a decision affecting him has been made’.

Elias LJ also stated that 
> ‘…the common law is moving to the position whilst there is no universal obligation to give reasons in all circumstances, in general they should be given unless there is a proper justification for not doing so’.

---
### Summary

There were strong reasons for saying that the common law should require reasons to be given for planning decisions unless it was clear from the relevant publicly available materials how the decision must have been reached.

### Abstract

The appellant appealed against a decision upholding the respondent local authority's grant of planning permission for a football stadium in the green belt.

The local authority's planning officer had recommended refusing planning permission on the basis that the very special circumstances required for granting permission for such development in the green belt had not been demonstrated. The planning committee did not follow that recommendation. It approved the development in principle but did not give reasons. The local authority subsequently granted permission. The judge rejected a challenge brought by the appellant, holding that the local authority had been under no duty to provide reasons.

The appellant argued that (1) the common law should require reasons to be given for planning decisions unless it was clear from the relevant publicly available materials how the decision must have been reached; (2) whatever the general position, the nature of the instant decision required reasons to be given, because the committee had departed from the officer's recommendation and the development was in the green belt.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) There was no general obligation to give reasons at common law, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, [1993] 6 WLUK 233](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65782B90E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9a989cf767f64244b68a604233257d54&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. However, the tendency was increasingly to require them rather than not, _[Stefan v General Medical Council [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1293, [1999] 3 WLUK 124](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBEA414E0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9a989cf767f64244b68a604233257d54&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. It was possibly more accurate to say that the common law was moving to the position that whilst there was no universal obligation to give reasons in all circumstances, in general they should be given unless there was a proper justification for not doing so (see paras [29-30](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). There was no general duty to provide reasons in planning cases, _[R. v Aylesbury Vale DC Ex p. Chaplin (1998) 76 P. & C.R. 207, [1997] 7 WLUK 695](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I327BCD50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9a989cf767f64244b68a604233257d54&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. There was force in the appellant's argument that a planning authority should not refuse to reveal its process of reasoning where that process was not otherwise clear. Individuals other than the applicant for permission had a legitimate interest in planning decisions. Reasons were required when a committee changed its mind; there was a powerful case for their being required when the committee disagreed with the planning officer. The situations were very similar. If there was no such requirement, there would be an anomaly between situations where there was disagreement and situations where the permission was in line with the officer's views. In the latter situation, the reasons could be inferred on the basis that the committee's reasons were those of the officer; that inference could not be drawn in the former situation and the reasons would be more obscure, making it more difficult to challenge the decision. It would not be unduly burdensome for the committee to have to produce reasons in such cases (paras [45-53](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). However, the appeal would not be decided on that broad principle. There could be particular circumstances, other than where the reasoning was transparent in any event, where there was justification for not imposing a common law duty. It was not necessary for the court to rely upon the broad argument because the duty arose under the appellant's narrower argument (para.[55](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(2) An important objective of environmental policies such as the green belt was to protect special features of the landscape. Strong reasons were required to justify interfering with those features. Developments changing the landscape would affect citizens in the locality. The common law would fail in its duty if it were to deny to those with a close and substantial interest in the decision the right to know why the decision had been taken. There was therefore a duty to give reasons, at least if the reasoning process was not otherwise sufficiently transparent. That conclusion was reinforced where the committee departed from the officer's recommendation. As well as leaving the reasoning obscure, the fact that the committee disagreed with a recommendation from an experienced officer on a matter of such significance suggested that some explanation was required (paras [58-61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The reasoning could not be adequately inferred in the instant case. There were numerous factors in play and there was no indication of how they had been assessed (para.[65](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) The duty in the [Openness of Local Government Bodies Regulations 2014 reg.7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6F3C08D01DE111E4BBB8D6E48055FA69/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9a989cf767f64244b68a604233257d54&contextData=(sc.Default)) to give reasons where an officer was authorised to grant permission did not require reasons to be given in the instant case. The reasons to be given were those which explained why the officer made the decision he did, but the starting point for that decision was the "in principle" planning permission given by the committee. The officer would have to give reasons why, starting from that premise, he had been satisfied that permission should be granted. However, he would not be obliged to obtain from the committee the reasons for its separate earlier decision conditionally to approve the development (para.[41](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).