### Summary

The detention of a football hooligan for four hours at the time of a match had been justified under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.5(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=77b36070aa4a4d118616981c8a3e19ef&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Abstract

The complainant (O) complained that his detention in the context of a football match had breached his right to liberty under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=77b36070aa4a4d118616981c8a3e19ef&contextData=(sc.Default)).

O supported Werder Bremen football club. He had been registered on databases concerning persons prepared to use violence in the context of sports events. On the day in question, he had travelled with a number of other fans to a match in Frankfurt. Before the match, the group, which had been placed under police surveillance, went to a pub. When the group left the pub, the police noted that O was no longer with them. He was found in a locked cubicle in the ladies' bathroom. He was arrested by the police there at roughly 14.30 and brought to the police station close to the football stadium. He was released at around 18.30 on the same day, one hour after the match had ended.

### Held

Complaint dismissed.

The respondent state had argued that O's detention was justified under art.5(1)(b) "in order to secure the fulfilment of an[y] obligation prescribed by law". For a detention to fall under that ground for a deprivation of liberty, it was necessary that the law permitted the detention of the person concerned to compel him to fulfil a specific and concrete obligation incumbent on him, which he had until then failed to satisfy. The obligation at issue, namely to keep the peace by not committing a criminal offence, could only be considered as "specific and concrete" if the place and time of the imminent commission of the offence and its potential victim(s) had been sufficiently specified. 

That was the case here: O was to be prevented from arranging a brawl between Bremen and Frankfurt hooligans in the hours before, during or after the match in Frankfurt or its vicinity and from committing offences, including bodily assaults and breaches of the peace, during such a brawl. Moreover, before his detention, O must have failed to fulfil his obligation to keep the peace by not committing a specific and concrete offence. It was sufficient if O had taken clear and positive steps which indicated that he would not fulfil his obligation. That requirement bore special importance in the context of a duty to refrain from doing something. 

To ensure that individuals were not subjected to arbitrary detention in such circumstances, it was necessary, before concluding that a person had failed to satisfy the obligation at issue, that he was made aware of the specific act which he was to refrain from committing and that he showed himself not to be willing to refrain from so doing. O had been ordered by the police to stay with the group with whom he had travelled and warned of the consequences of his failure to comply with that order, the police having announced that any person leaving the group would be arrested. Moreover, the group had already been escorted on their train trip from Bremen to Frankfurt; they had been searched at Frankfurt's central station and found to be in possession of instruments typically used in hooligan brawls. By those measures, O had been made aware of the fact that the police intended to avert a hooligan brawl and that he was under a specific obligation to refrain from arranging and/or participating in such a brawl. 

Further, the domestic authorities could reasonably conclude that, by trying to evade police surveillance and by entering, as he had, into contact with a hooligan from Frankfurt, O was trying to arrange a brawl. By taking those clear and positive steps or preparatory acts, he had shown that he was not willing to comply with his obligation to keep the peace by refraining from arranging and/or participating in the altercation at issue. It had also to be shown that O's detention was aimed at or directly contributed to securing the fulfilment of the obligation and was not punitive in character; that was the case. Moreover, O had not been detained for longer than was necessary. His detention was therefore proportionate to the aim of securing the immediate fulfilment of the relevant obligation. In the circumstances, his deprivation of liberty was justified under art.5(1)(b) (see paras 90, 93-97, 102-103 of judgment).