### Summary

In considering the limitation period for bringing a claim under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.7(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c69c731dba34a439c8d84f2e2d0a378&contextData=(sc.Default)), the expression "the date on which the act complained of took place" could include a course of conduct and did not have to be interpreted as meaning an instantaneous act. A barrister's claim that the Bar Standards Board had indirectly discriminated against her by bringing and pursuing disciplinary proceedings was therefore not time-barred because those proceedings amounted to a single, continuous course of conduct which continued until the conclusion of the barrister's appeal to the Visitors to the Inns of Court.

### Abstract

A barrister appealed against a decision that her human rights claim against the Bar Standards Board was time-barred.

The barrister had claimed damages from the Bar Standards Board under the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c69c731dba34a439c8d84f2e2d0a378&contextData=(sc.Default)), alleging discrimination in breach of [ECHR art.14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4B389092B9994E42A84BEAB24213F0A3/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c69c731dba34a439c8d84f2e2d0a378&contextData=(sc.Default)), read in conjunction with her right to a fair trial under [art.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1FBD48E5924705BFBD5299078ED2BC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c69c731dba34a439c8d84f2e2d0a378&contextData=(sc.Default)). The barrister was black, and her claim was based on allegations that the Board had indirectly discriminated against her on the ground of her race in bringing disciplinary proceedings against her. The disciplinary tribunal had found proved five out of the six disciplinary charges, but the barrister's appeal to the Visitors to the Inns of Court had been allowed. The Board maintained that the human rights claim was time-barred under [s.7(5)(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c69c731dba34a439c8d84f2e2d0a378&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act, which provided that proceedings had to be brought before the end of the period of one year beginning with the date on which the act complained of took place. The High Court found that the art.14 claim had a real prospect of success, but determined that it was time-barred. The Court of Appeal upheld that decision, finding that the one-year time limit had started to run when the disciplinary tribunal had found the charges against the barrister proved, and had therefore expired before she had issued her claim.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

**Did the disciplinary proceedings amount to a single continuing act?** Yes. The expression "the date on which the act complained of took place" was apt to address a single event, but should not be read narrowly. There would be many situations in which the conduct which gave rise to the infringement of an ECHR right would not be an instantaneous act, but a course of conduct. The words of s.7(5)(a) should be given a meaning which enabled them to apply to a continuing act of alleged incompatibility. Although [s.7(5)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c69c731dba34a439c8d84f2e2d0a378&contextData=(sc.Default)) might often empower a court to grant an extension of time to bring proceedings, it was inappropriate to leave a claimant to have recourse to such a discretionary remedy. In the instant case, the alleged infringement of ECHR rights arose from a single, continuous course of conduct. Although disciplinary proceedings brought by the Board necessarily involved a series of steps, the essence of the barrister's complaint was the initiation and pursuit of the proceedings to their conclusion. That was the entirety of the course of conduct. It could not have been Parliament's intention that each step should be an "act" to which the one-year limitation period should apply. Time ran from the date when the continuing act ceased, not when it began (see paras [23, 29-30](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**When did the single continuing act end?** In considering whether the Board's conduct in proceedings before the Visitors should be considered as forming part of the same continuing act as its conduct in proceedings before the disciplinary tribunal, it was necessary to have regard to the nature of the regulatory scheme and the precise features of the Board's conduct. Several features of the regulatory scheme and the Visitors' jurisdiction led to the conclusion that the Board's part in proceedings before the disciplinary tribunal and those before the Visitors should be regarded as part of a single, continuing act. In particular, the Visitors had a supervisory jurisdiction in relation to disciplinary proceedings, which included a function of hearing appeals from disciplinary tribunals. For the purposes of s.7(5)(a), the Board's conduct in bringing and pursuing the disciplinary proceedings was a single, continuing act which continued until the Visitors allowed the appeal. The instant proceedings had therefore been commenced within a period of one year beginning with the date on which the act complained of took place (paras [34-35, 39](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Had the High Court erred in finding that the art.14 claim had a real prospect of success?** No. The High Court had been correct to conclude that there were reasonable grounds for bringing the claim. The Board maintained that the discrimination claim could have no real prospect of success without statistics sufficient to raise a prima facie case of discrimination. The barrister's case was partly based on a report into the Board's complaints system, which analysed data over a four-year period. She was entitled to rely on that evidence, so far as it went, in conjunction with the unhappy history of the proceedings against her. An inference from statistical data was not the only way in which a claimant could establish an infringement of art.14. Indirect discrimination could be proved without statistical evidence (para.[43](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).