### Summary

On an application for an interim measure under the European Court of Human Rights Rules of Court r.39, the ECtHR held that there would have been a violation of [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c5e7c5be858e4faf8f05c73e17fd84c4&contextData=(sc.Default)) had the applicant, who suffered from a life-threatening condition, been removed from Belgium to his country of origin, Georgia. The Belgian authorities had not properly investigated whether suitable medical treatment was available in Georgia, had not considered the applicant's medical situation in the context of removal, and had not properly assessed the risk to him.

### Abstract

The applicant sought an interim measure under the Rules of Court r.39 to suspend his proposed removal from Belgium.

The applicant was a Georgian national who had arrived in Belgium with his family in 1998. Although the family's asylum claim was rejected, they remained in Belgium without a valid residence permit. Over the following years, the applicant served two prison sentences for robbery and involvement in a criminal organisation. In 2010 his wife and children were granted indefinite leave to remain; however, his request for regularisation of his immigration status was rejected and he was served with an order requiring him to leave the country. He suffered from tuberculosis, hepatitis C and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and had a shortened life expectancy. He was receiving treatment in Belgium and adduced medical evidence to the effect that if his treatment were to cease his life expectancy would be reduced to six months. He asserted that the treatment he needed would not be available to him in Georgia, and that removing him would therefore violate [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c5e7c5be858e4faf8f05c73e17fd84c4&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c5e7c5be858e4faf8f05c73e17fd84c4&contextData=(sc.Default)). He also asserted that there would be a violation of [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c5e7c5be858e4faf8f05c73e17fd84c4&contextData=(sc.Default)), given that he had established a family life in Belgium. He died in June 2016, before he could be removed.

### Held

Application granted.

**Art.3** - Subject to their Treaty obligations, contracting states had the right to expel aliens. In principle, persons who were subject to expulsion were not entitled to remain in order to continue receiving medical or social assistance. However, there might be a violation of art.3 where the person concerned was close to death and removal would expose him to a real risk of dying under most distressing circumstances, _[D v United Kingdom (30240/96) (1997) 24 E.H.R.R. 423, [1997] 5 WLUK 64](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9392A650E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c5e7c5be858e4faf8f05c73e17fd84c4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. There might also be a violation in other "very exceptional cases", _[N v United Kingdom (26565/05) (2008) 47 E.H.R.R. 39, [2008] 5 WLUK 632](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA2DBCF60345211DD8B7D9E7E5A0AD1BD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c5e7c5be858e4faf8f05c73e17fd84c4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The inferiority of the heath facilities in the receiving state was not of itself an exceptional circumstance, and nor was the fact that the individual's life expectancy would be significantly reduced by removal. Very exceptional cases were those which involved the removal of seriously ill persons where there were substantial grounds for believing that, although death was not imminent, they would face a real risk of a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in their health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy due to a lack of access to appropriate treatment in the receiving country. 

An applicant had to adduce evidence capable of demonstrating that there were substantial grounds for believing that they would be exposed to a real risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to art.3 if removed. It was then for the returning state to dispel any doubts raised by that evidence. In doing so, it had to closely scrutinise the asserted risk; consider the foreseeable consequences of removal in the light of the general situation in the receiving state; consider how the applicant's state of health might evolve after removal; verify on a case-by-case basis whether the care available in the receiving state would prevent the applicant from being exposed to treatment contrary to art.3; and consider the extent to which the applicant would have access to care in the receiving state. 

Where there were serious doubts about the impact of removal, the returning state had to obtain assurances from the receiving state that appropriate treatment would be available and accessible (see paras 172-193 of judgment). The applicant had a life-threatening illness and had adduced medical evidence showing that he would have less than six months to live were treatment to stop. Appropriate treatment was not available in Georgia, and shortcomings in the Georgian social insurance system meant that there was no guarantee that he would have access to such treatment as was available. The Belgian authorities had not examined the evidence, had not considered the applicant's medical situation in the context of removal, and had not properly assessed the risk he faced. There was insufficient information to support their conclusion that he would not run a real risk of treatment contrary to art.3 if returned to Georgia. There would have been a violation of art.3 had he been removed, and in those circumstances it was unnecessary to examine the complaint under art.2 (paras 194-207)

**Art.8** - The Belgian authorities had not considered the degree to which the applicant was dependent on his family as a result of his ill-health. Had they concluded that art.3 was not a bar to removal, they would have had to consider whether his family could reasonably have been expected to follow him to Georgia or, if not, whether art.8 required that he be granted leave to remain in Belgium for the time he had left to live. Had he been removed to Georgia without these factors having been assessed, there would also have been a violation of art.8 (paras 223-225).