### Summary

There had been an infringement of the property rights of the members of a taxi association under the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago s.4(a). By introducing Regulations subjecting the members to the control and management of a third party, the state had acted in breach of previous representations and assurances given to the members which gave rise to a substantive legitimate expectation that the members would be able to manage their own affairs.

### Abstract

The appellant members of a taxi association (P) appealed against a ruling of the Court of Appeal of Trinidad and Tobago dismissing its claim for breach of property rights.

Prior to 1995 P operated from a taxi stand from which it controlled and managed its own affairs and did not have to pay a levy or fee for its use. In 1995 the government proposed moving the taxi stand to a new location on land owned by the Public Transport Service Corporation (PTSC). P regarded the PTSC as its competitor. P was reluctant to move but eventually did so in reliance on assurances and representations given by the government that P would not be under the control of the PTSC and following the provision of training, the management of the new location would be handed over to P within six months at the most. Management was not handed over to P and instead the government introduced the Port-of-Spain Transit Centre (Public Service Vehicle Station) Regulations (No 227 of 1997) which gave the PTSC responsibility for managing the location, the power to charge P for its use, and required P to apply to the PTSC for a permit. Since 2001, P had been required to pay a fee to use its taxi stand. Further, it was the only taxi owner required to apply to the PTSC for a permit and satisfy the PTSC that it was a fit and proper person to use the taxi stand. P claimed that by making the 1997 Regulations, the government had acted in breach of the representations and frustrated P's legitimate expectation of a substantive benefit in a way which affected its property rights protected under the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago s.4(a). The court at first instance found in P's favour but that decision was reversed by the Court of Appeal.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) It was not necessary for P to show that what the PTSC did pursuant to the 1997 Regulations was to deprive it of its business altogether. There was no warrant for interpreting s.4(a) in that way. The interference with P's business was substantial. It had previously managed and controlled its own affairs and was now subject to the control and management of its competitor. There was therefore a prima facia infringement of P’s section 4(a) rights, _[Tre Traktorer AB v Sweden (A/159) (1991) 13 E.H.R.R. 309, [1989] 7 WLUK 78](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID758D980E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=258a35f1a5854cc98df09c6fba7605fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (see para [25](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The focus therefore was whether the interference with P's property rights could be justified "by due process of law". The representations given by the government were clear, unambiguous and devoid of relevant qualification. They were made to a defined class, namely P, and were relied upon. The critical representation was that P would not be under the control and management of the PTSC. That gave rise to a substantive legitimate expectation that P would be permitted to control and manage its own affairs at the new location and would not be under the control of the PTSC, _[R. (on the application of Bancoult) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2008] UKHL 61, [2009] 1 A.C. 453, [2008] 10 WLUK 552](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6B721920A0B411DD9387A576173B974D/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=258a35f1a5854cc98df09c6fba7605fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of Association of British Civilian Internees (Far East Region)) v Secretary of State for Defence [2003] EWCA Civ 473, [2003] Q.B. 1397, [2003] 4 WLUK 118](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I750B71C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=258a35f1a5854cc98df09c6fba7605fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. By making the 1997 Regulations and authorising the PTSC to manage and control P, the government acted in breach of those representations and frustrated that legitimate expectation. Further it was for the government to then prove that there was an overriding public interest which justified the frustration of that expectation. Without such evidence the court was unlikely to be willing to draw an inference in favour of the government. In the instant case, no evidence had been provided as to the reasons why the 1997 Regulations were made notwithstanding that their effect would be in conflict with the representations. The government had not therefore proved that there was such an overriding public interest. It was also incumbent upon the government to show that in its decision making process, it had taken into account the fact that the effect of the 1997 Regulations was to breach the earlier representations. It had signally failed to do so, _[R. v North and East Devon HA Ex p. Coughlan [2001] Q.B. 213, [1999] 7 WLUK 371](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B8B1FC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=258a35f1a5854cc98df09c6fba7605fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[R. (on the application of Bibi) v Newham LBC (No.1) [2001] EWCA Civ 607, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 237, [2001] 4 WLUK 438](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I789052C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=258a35f1a5854cc98df09c6fba7605fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [34-47](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(Lord Brown dissenting) (1) So far from it being an abuse of power to introduce "reasonable charges" after giving P five years of free use of the facility, that it seemed entirely unsurprising and properly authorised by the 1997 Regulations.