### Abstract

The charge to tax on employees in relation to benefits in kind must be based on the overall rather than the incremental cost to the employer. H, along with other members of the staff of Malvern College, was allowed to have his son educated at the school at a concessionary rate of one-fifth of the standard fee. This covered the direct costs attributable to the boys, e.g. food, stationery and laundry, but excluded overheads. At all relevant times there was surplus capacity in the school. It was conceded that the concessionary fee was potentially a taxable benefit, but it was contended that the benefit should be valued on the basis of marginal cost, so that there was no tax payable. H and his colleagues appealed against assessments based on the total costs of running the school. The special commissioner allowed their appeal, but his decision was reversed in the High Court.

Held, dismissing the taxpayers' appeals, that the motive of those providing the benefit was irrelevant and that the fact that an "in-house" benefit comprised use of surplus capacity did not, of itself, affect the expense calculation which the statutory formula called for (_[Rendell v Went (Inspector of Taxes) [1964] 1 W.L.R. 650, [1964] 5 WLUK 14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I85A94A20E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5c75557d8a7e4a54ad28e16eb1fc028d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied). For the provisions relating to employee benefits in kind, see now I.C.T.A. 1988, ss.154, 156.