#key-case 

### Summary

An order made under the [British Nationality Act 1981 s.40(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I10189410E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default)) depriving a Vietnamese-born individual of his British citizenship did not render him stateless even though the Vietnamese government had subsequently declined to accept him as a Vietnamese citizen.

### Abstract

The appellant (P) appealed against a decision (_[[2013] EWCA Civ 616](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4F4E6880C4CB11E28EA19F72C0D273E3/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that he had not been rendered stateless by the respondent secretary of state's decision to deprive him of his British citizenship.

P, who was born in Vietnam, had come to the UK in 1989, acquiring British citizenship in 1995. In 2004, he converted to Islam. In December 2011, the secretary of state made an order under the [British Nationality Act 1981 s.40(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I10189410E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default)) depriving him of his British citizenship on the basis that he was involved in terrorism-related activities. She served him with a notice of intended deportation, but the Vietnamese government declined to accept him as a Vietnamese citizen, claiming that he had lost his Vietnamese citizenship upon acquiring British citizenship in 1995. At a preliminary hearing, the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) upheld P's appeal against the s.40(2) order. Although it accepted that, applying the letter of the Vietnamese law, P remained a Vietnamese citizen, it found that the executive could make whatever decision it wished on the issue of nationality. In those circumstances, it found that the Vietnamese government's failure to accept P as a Vietnamese citizen meant that the order rendered him stateless within the meaning of [s.40(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I10189410E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default)). The Court of Appeal reversed that decision, holding that P retained his Vietnamese citizenship. Whether the secretary of state's order rendered P stateless depended on whether P was somebody who Vietnam did not consider to be a national "under the operation of its law" within the meaning of the Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons 1954 art.1(1). The issues were (i) whether the phrase "under the operation of its law" referred solely to the letter of the law, or also to its operation in practice, regardless of whether that practice was subject to effective challenge in the courts; (ii) whether EU law governed the question of whether it would be lawful to deprive a person of his British citizenship where to do so would also deprive him of his EU citizenship; (iii) whether it would be disproportionate under EU law to deprive P of his British citizenship.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) The question arising under art.1(1) was not necessarily to be decided solely by reference to the text of the state's legislation; reference could also be made to governmental practice, even if that was not subject to effective challenge in the courts. The term "law", at least as understood by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was to be interpreted broadly as including ministerial decrees or practices, even if they appeared to depart from the substance of the domestic law. However, even the broadest interpretation did not provide sufficient support for SIAC's reasoning. The Vietnamese legislation was deliberately ambiguous on the issue of dual nationality, so as to allow the executive to make whatever decisions it wished. However, the government had not made any decision or adopted any practice in relation to P such as to deprive him of his Vietnamese citizenship as at the date of the s.40(2) decision. P had Vietnamese nationality when the secretary of state made her decision: he had not automatically lost it upon acquiring British nationality, and the Vietnamese government had taken no action to deprive him of it. At that stage, it had not expressed any view about his status (see paras [34-38, 66-67, 101](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (2) Issues (ii) and (iii) raised the question of whether the secretary of state's decision fell within the ambit of EU law. However, the EU law aspects were not properly before the instant court. The scope of the instant appeal was limited by reference to the preliminary issue defined by SIAC, which was confined to the narrow question of statelessness under s.40. The issue of EU law would clearly raise difficult issues. The decision in _[R. (on the application of G1 (Sudan)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 867, [2013] Q.B. 1008, [2012] 7 WLUK 99](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE5C96850C62F11E19C5BDAA1769AF9CC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ raised issues of general importance which were not clearly answered by subsequent authorities, and there was force in its criticism of some of the reasoning in _[Rottmann v Freistaat Bayern (C-135/08) EU:C:2010:104, [2010] Q.B. 761, [2010] 3 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I86029B307D8E11DF82BDEC4447275D11/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default))_GI and Rottmann considered. However, a reference to the CJEU was not appropriate: the issue would first need to be considered by the instant court or by the Court of Appeal. Before that stage was reached, it was important that SIAC should identify the respects in which a decision on those legal issues might become necessary for disposal of the instant case. P relied on the EU requirement of proportionality but had not shown how that differed from the issue of proportionality already before SIAC under the ECHR or from principles applicable under domestic law. The courts took a flexible approach to principles of judicial review, particularly where important rights such as the removal of citizenship were at stake, and proportionality was a valuable tool, _[Kennedy v Information Commissioner [2014] UKSC 20, [2015] A.C. 455, [2014] 3 WLUK 755](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I15B03E80B4E111E3AB12840362EEA953/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0edf9649f317459484591e03e377b99d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. It was improbable that the nature or outcome of such a review would differ according to whether it was conducted under domestic or EU law principles (paras [39, 56-62, 71, 84-85, 90-100, 102-111, 120](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).