The courts have no power to examine proceedings in Parliament to determine whether the passing of an Act, public or private, had been obtained by irregularity or fraud. 

The Board were successors in title to the company owning land on which a railway line ran. By the Bristol and Exeter Railway Act 1836 s.259 if the railway should be abandoned the land would vest in the owners of the adjoining land. In 1968 Parliament passed the British Railways Act 1968, a private Act, cancelling the effect of Bristol and Exeter Railway Act 1836 s.259. From the early 1960's use of the line was discontinued in stages, the track being taken up in 1969. P, who had bought part of the relevant adjoining land to obtain locus standi, sought a declaration that he owned the land to the middle of the track. The Board applied to strike out that part of P's pleading which alleged that the British Railways Act 1968 was ineffective since it contained a false recital and its passing had been obtained by the Board's misleading Parliament. 

On appeal, held, allowing the Board's appeal and ordering the striking out, that P's allegations could only be established by examining the procedure by which Parliament passed the Act, which examination, of either public or private Acts, the court was not empowered to entertain. (Pickin v. British Railways Board [1972] C.L.Y. 3289 reversed; _[Edinburgh & Dalkeith Railway v Wauchope 8 E.R. 279, [1842] 3 WLUK 97](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I416E21A0E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0b5a5236767a4592b8fe347dbe4d41e9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Lee v Bude & Torrington Junction Railway Co (1870-71) L.R. 6 C.P. 576, [1871] 6 WLUK 109](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF7B2CE0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0b5a5236767a4592b8fe347dbe4d41e9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).