P complained to the European Court of Human Rights that her rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb143ecace2f4e97afb55fa22f9caf23&contextData=(sc.Default)) , Art.3, Art.8 and Art.14 had been infringed. P was in the advanced stages of a fatal incurable degenerative disease. She was frightened and distressed by the suffering and indignity that she would have to endure as the disease progressed and wished to control how and when she died to be spared such suffering and indignity. Although suicide was not a crime, P, by reason of her physical condition, was unable to take her own life. She required the assistance of her husband. To assist another to commit suicide was a criminal offence and the Director of Public Prosecutions declined to grant an indemnity against the prosecution of P's husband. Proceedings issued by P in the United Kingdom culminated in her appeal to the House of Lords being dismissed.

Held, dismissing the complaint, that 

(1) the right to life guaranteed by Art.2 could not be interpreted as conferring a right to die. It was not concerned with issues such as quality of life and did not confer a right to self determination of life; 

(2) Art.3 applied to some positive form of treatment or intentionally inflicted acts by the state. The state's alleged failure to prevent P from suffering in the later stages of her disease by not granting immunity to her husband could not amount to inhuman or degrading treatment; 

(3) the concept of a private life under Art.8 was a broad term not capable of precise definition. The essence of the Convention was a respect for human dignity and P was seeking to avoid degradation and suffering as her condition progressed. She was prevented from exercising her choice by the law of the state and that was a potential interference with her right to respect for her private life. However, such interference could be compatible with Art.8 if it was in accordance with the law, had a legitimate aim and was necessary in a democratic society. The protection of those who were terminally ill and might be vulnerable to abuse if assisted suicide was not a crime was a necessary safeguard. The blanket ban on assisted suicide was not disproportionate and the interference was justified. There was no violation of Art.8; 

(4) the fact that P held an honest belief in assisted suicide did not absolve her husband from the consequences of the criminal law, which had been held to be justified, and 

(5) Art.14 had effect only in relation to other provisions of the Convention, which in the instant case had not been violated.