### Abstract

The Crown may be bound by a statute "by necessary implication". 

This may be manifest from the terms of the statute, and in such a case the result is the same as if the Crown had been expressly named therein. It is not right to say that a statute must apply to the Crown merely because the statutory duty could not be carried out efficiently unless it applied to the Crown in the same way as it applied to the subject or that the statute must apply to the Crown because it is enacted "for the public good". Only if it can be affirmed that, at the time when the statute was passed and received the royal sanction, it was apparent from its terms that its beneficial purpose must be wholly frustrated unless the Crown were bound, may it be inferred that the Crown agreed to be bound. 

Scottish law that where provisions in a statute having for its object the benefit of the public apply to all the land in a city, they also apply to the Crown's property, unless the Crown's property is held jure coronce, is different from English law. The mere fact that there are certain express references saving the rights of the Crown in a statute does not prove that the Crown is bound by other provisions in the same statute which do not contain such saving rights. The City of Bombay Municipal Act 1888 , gave the commissioner rights to lay water mains and pipes and to construct drains and drainage works in the city. Certain land in the city was acquired by the Crown for the purpose of housing government employees. The city engineer was desirous of laying a water main along that land. The Crown was only willing to consent on certain conditions. Eventually, the commissioner under the provisions of the Act gave notice to carry out this work without complying with these conditions.

Held, that the Crown was not "by necessary implication" bound by the Act, _[Gorton Local Board v Prison Commissioners [1904] 2 K.B. 165 (Note), [1887] 6 WLUK 59](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB2C65210E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac7952eef9db4c53ac215a7cd5b497b7&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ , _[Attorney General v Hancock [1940] 1 K.B. 427, [1939] 12 WLUK 36](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I694073A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac7952eef9db4c53ac215a7cd5b497b7&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ , _[Hornsey Urban DC v Hennell [1902] 2 K.B. 73, [1902] 4 WLUK 9](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC39880E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac7952eef9db4c53ac215a7cd5b497b7&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ , _[Cooper v Hawkins [1904] 2 K.B. 164, [1903] 7 WLUK 66](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8E329CB0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac7952eef9db4c53ac215a7cd5b497b7&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ , _[Somerville v Queen, The (1893) 20 R. 1050, [1893] 7 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB6B968C1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac7952eef9db4c53ac215a7cd5b497b7&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ and _[Edinburgh Magistrates v Lord Advocate 1912 S.C. 1085, [1912] 6 WLUK 67](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FC27630E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac7952eef9db4c53ac215a7cd5b497b7&contextData=(sc.DocLink))_ followed not good law in England.