### Summary

The ability of the Secretary of State to act as decision maker in relation to planning matters in which he had also been involved in policy formulation did not amount to a breach of the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.6.1, given the powers of the courts to ensure the compatibility of the overall process by means of judicial review.

### Abstract

The Secretary of State appealed against a declaration ([2001] H.R.L.R. 2) that his powers to determine planning applications were incompatible with the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.6.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a1e9b27f76114666aa1f3d2070d2e724&contextData=(sc.Default)), given his involvement in the formulation of planning policy. HB contended that whilst there had been no actual bias, the dual role of the Secretary of State in formulating policy and taking decisions on applications received inevitably resulted in a situation whereby there had not been a disposal before an independent and impartial tribunal. The Secretary of State conceded that his role in the process could not be described as independent and impartial but maintained that there was adequate judicial control to safeguard the overall fairness of the process.

Held, allowing the appeal, that the courts were able to exercise sufficient control over the decision making portion of the Secretary of State's role by means of judicial review as a result of which it was possible to set aside a particular decision for a multiplicity of reasons. The courts were only obliged to exercise control over that portion of the role that was concerned with the lawfulness of the decision and the adequacy of the procedural steps involved. The court had no function to review the policy making portion of the Secretary of State's role, _[Zumtobel v Austria (A/268-A) (1994) 17 E.H.R.R. 116, [1993] 9 WLUK 94](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1244C5E0E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a1e9b27f76114666aa1f3d2070d2e724&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Iskcon v United Kingdom (Unreported, March 8, 1994) and _[Bryan v United Kingdom (A/335-A) (1996) 21 E.H.R.R. 342, [1995] 11 WLUK 346](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7CC9FA40E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a1e9b27f76114666aa1f3d2070d2e724&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. It had often been suggested that the reference to "full jurisdiction" in _[Albert v Belgium (A/58) (1983) 5 E.H.R.R. 533, [1983] 2 WLUK 109](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I54586E70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a1e9b27f76114666aa1f3d2070d2e724&contextData=(sc.Default))_ required that an underlying policy decision taken by an administrator who did not comply with Art.6 had to be capable of review on its merits. To subsume the Secretary of State's role in policy making in such a fashion would be undemocratic and contrary to established European jurisprudence. Accordingly there were sufficient procedural safeguards in the form of judicial review available to render the adoption of the dual role lawful, Albert explained.