Facts

In _Anderson,_ the claimant had been convicted of two murders, for which he received mandatory life sentences. In accordance with his stated practice, the Home Secretary received advice from the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice before deciding the tariff. The tariff he imposed was longer than that recommended by the judiciary. The claimant challenged it on the grounds, _inter alia_, that as the Home Secretary was a member of the executive rather than a member of an independent and impartial tribunal, he had acted incompatibly with the right to a fair trial under article 6(1), ECHR.

Decision

Their lordships found that s. 29 of the Act was incompatible with article 6(1) but declined to follow the appellant’s Counsel’s submission that the House should use its s. 3, HRA power to reads s. 29 in a Convention-compatible way, which would have involved precluding the participation of the Home Secretary from the decision-making process. Lord Bingham stated that to do so would ‘…not be judicial interpretation but judicial vandalism’ and he referenced the judgment in [[Re S (Children) and Re W (Care Orders) [2002] UKHL 10]]. Lord Steyn agreed with Lord Bingham’s decision and reasons.

---

### Summary

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's power set a "tariff" determining the minimum period of imprisonment to be served by a mandatory life sentence prisoner was incompatible with the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.6 given that this power amounted to a sentencing exercise, forming part of the trial, which was to be conducted by an independent court or tribunal rather than a member of the executive.

### Abstract

A appealed against a decision ([2001] EWCA Civ 1698, [2002] 2 W.L.R. 1143) refusing his application for judicial review of the Secretary of State for the Home Department's decision to fix A's "tariff", determining the minimum period of imprisonment which A should serve, at a longer period than that recommended by the judiciary. A had been given a mandatory life sentence for murder and both the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice had recommended that A's tariff be set at 15 years' imprisonment. However, under the provisions of the [Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F2D8200E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cdcbf2ca3c545b7a15e7266e035a812&contextData=(sc.Default)), the Secretary of State had fixed the tariff, prior to which time A could not be given a parole hearing, at a term of 20 years. A argued that the fixing of a longer tariff amounted to an infringement of his right to a fair trial guaranteed under the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cdcbf2ca3c545b7a15e7266e035a812&contextData=(sc.Default)).

Held, allowing the appeal in part, that the Secretary of State for the Home Department's power to fix sentencing tariffs was incompatible with the right to a fair trial guaranteed under Art.6 of the 1998 Act. When determining A's rights under the 1998 Act the court had a duty to seek to give effect to the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights who had made it clear that the fixing of a tariff was considered to be a sentencing exercise rather than the administrative implementation of a life sentence that had already been passed, _[Stafford v United Kingdom (46295/99) (2002) 35 E.H.R.R. 32, [2002] 5 WLUK 812](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBDF1B4D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cdcbf2ca3c545b7a15e7266e035a812&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed, _[Wynne v United Kingdom (15484/89) (1995) 19 E.H.R.R. 333, [1994] 7 WLUK 221](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0A5AB600E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cdcbf2ca3c545b7a15e7266e035a812&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished. In the light of this authority the fixing of a tariff formed part of A's trial and as such was to be conducted by an independent court or tribunal in accordance with Art.6(1) of the 1998 Act. It was fundamental to the rule of law and the separation of powers that the Secretary of State, a member of the executive, should not perform functions of the judiciary and this extended to cases in which the Secretary of State had only confirmed the tariff recommended by the trial judge and Lord Chief Justice, _[Benjamin v United Kingdom (28212/95) (2003) 36 E.H.R.R. 1, [2002] 9 WLUK 327](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I739282D0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cdcbf2ca3c545b7a15e7266e035a812&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. It was impossible to interpret s.29 of the 1997 Act so as to preclude the participation of the Secretary of State in the sentencing process and as such it was declared incompatible with A's human rights in accordance with s.4(2) of the 1998 Act.

---

Court decided it could not interpret compatibly. Home Sec used to be able to set tariff. In Anderson, decided that this was against Convention rights. Lord Steyn was on the panel, so even he accepted there were limits to how far this could be pushed. 