The applicants were relatives of six Iraqi civilians who, it was claimed, had been killed by UK armed forces in Basra during 2003. The House of Lords held that although liability under the HRA 1998 could extend outside the territorial jurisdiction of the UK in limited situations, the claims of five of the civilians could not succeed because they were killed in the course of general security operations when the UK did not have sufficient control over Iraq. However, the sixth civilian, Baha Mousa, came within the jurisdiction of the UK under Article 1, as he died as a result of injuries inflicted by UK armed forces personnel inside a detention unit controlled by British forces.

---

### Summary

The [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) should be interpreted as applying not only when a public authority acted within the United Kingdom but also when it acted within the jurisdiction of the UK for the purposes of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID974C9D83A194A90B735FDDC6203A5AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) but outside the territory of the UK.

### Abstract

The appellants (S) appealed against a decision (_[[2005] EWCA Civ 1609, [2007] Q.B. 140](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74F2B9A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that their claims against the respondent secretary of state fell outside the scope of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)). The secretary of state cross appealed against the court's decision that the claim of the sixth appellant (M) fell within the scope of the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B21C140E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The appellants were relatives of Iraqi citizens who, it was claimed, had been unlawfully killed by members of British armed forces in southern Iraq in 2003. As to M's claim, it was alleged that his son had died as a result of injuries sustained in a detention unit in a British military base. In 2004, the appellants' representative wrote to the secretary of state asking him to hold a public inquiry into their relatives' deaths. The secretary of state having indicated that he would not do so, the appellants issued proceedings, asserting that the secretary of state's decision was unlawful under [s.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1998 Act, as it was incompatible with their rights under [Art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Convention.

The secretary of state argued that (1) the 1998 Act did not apply outside the territory of the United Kingdom; (2) in any event, with the exception of M's son, the deceased had not been within the jurisdiction of the UK for the purposes of [Art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID974C9D83A194A90B735FDDC6203A5AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Convention when they were killed.

### Held

Judgment accordingly.

(Lord Bingham dissenting on the first issue) 

(1) Section 6 of the 1998 Act should be interpreted as applying not only when a public authority acted within the UK but also when it acted within the jurisdiction of the UK for the purposes of Art.1 of the Convention but outside the territory of the UK. The purpose of the 1998 Act was to provide remedies in domestic law to those whose human rights had been violated by a UK public authority. Making such remedies available for acts of a UK authority in the territory of another state would not be offensive to the sovereignty of the other state. There was therefore nothing in the wider context of international law which pointed to the need to confine s.6 and [s.7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1998 Act to the territory of the UK. Further, Lord Nicholls had confirmed in _[R. (on the application of Quark Fishing Ltd) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (No.2) [2005] UKHL 57, [2006] 1 A.C. 529, [2005] 10 WLUK 385](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7ED1E2C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that, in interpreting the rights in [Sch.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default)) to the Act, courts had to take account of the territorial scope of the relevant right under the Convention. In the instant case, that meant having regard to those exceptional situations where Art.2 would apply outside the territory of the UK. In other words, on a fair interpretation, Art.2 in Sch.1 had to be read as applying wherever the UK had jurisdiction in terms of Art.1 of the Convention. The corollary was that s.6 had also to be interpreted as applying in the same circumstances, Quark Fishing applied. 

(2) The secretary of state had accepted that, as the relevant events had occurred in a British detention unit, M's son had met his death "within the jurisdiction" of the UK for the purposes of Art.1. In those circumstances, the parties were agreed that, because of certain factual developments, M's case should be remitted to the Divisional Court. As to the other appellants, their relatives had not been within the jurisdiction of the UK for the purposes of Art.1 when they were killed. In that respect, it would not be proper to proceed beyond the jurisprudence of the European Court in _[Bankovic v Belgium (Admissibility) (52207/99) 11 B.H.R.C. 435, [2001] 12 WLUK 302](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFBA8DEA0E4B611DAB61499BEED25CD3B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default))_, in which the court had stated that the vocation of the Convention was "essentially regional" and that it operated "in an essentially regional context and notably in the legal space (espace juridique) of the contracting states", Bankovic applied and _[Issa v Turkey (31821/96) (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 27, [2004] 11 WLUK 443](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICAF82B11E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d573b5164d6415b9679ccf3b5efe1d7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ not applied. Appeals dismissed, cross-appeal dismissed.