### Summary

British citizen captured by US forces in Afghanistan and held under control of US military at US naval base in Cuba - Detention in apparent contravention of international law as it was without recourse to courts - Detainee had legitimate expectation that UK would act in furtherance of policy to protect citizens abroad - Secretary of State had discussed position of British detainees with US authorities - Claimants not entitled to any relief - Territorial effect of European Convention on Human Rights Art 1.

### Abstract

A, a British national captured by United States forces in Afghanistan and detained at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba without trial or legal representation, sought judicial review to compel the Foreign Office, inter alia, to make representations on his behalf to the United States Government. A contended that his fundamental right not to be arbitrarily detained was being infringed and the fact that he had no means of challenging the legality of his detention gave rise to a duty on the part of the Secretary of State to assist him. The Secretary of State contended that the English court 
(1) could not examine the legitimacy of action taken by a foreign sovereign state, and 
(2) could not adjudicate upon actions taken by the executive in the conduct of foreign relations.

Held, refusing the application for judicial review, that the underlying principle, fundamental in English law, was that every imprisonment was prima facie unlawful, and that no member of the executive could interfere with the liberty of a British subject except on condition that he could support the legality of his action before a court of justice, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Khawaja [1984] A.C. 74, [1983] 2 WLUK 112](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I658A5401E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6062ba2a96c54748941103eff9a125ff&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. A's claim for review had to be approached on the basis that, in apparent contravention of fundamental principles recognised by both American and English jurisdictions and by international law, A was arbitrarily detained. Whilst his detention as an alleged "enemy combatant" might be justified, it appeared objectionable that A should be subject to indefinite detention with no chance to challenge the legitimacy of his detention before any court or tribunal. It was clear that there was no direct remedy in the English Court of Appeal; the United States Government was not before the court and no order of the court would be binding upon it.

Further, international law had not yet recognised that a state was under a duty to intervene by diplomatic or other means to protect a citizen who was suffering or threatened with injury in a foreign state. The essential principles which could be derived from the authorities came nowhere near rendering A within the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom for the purposes of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID974C9D83A194A90B735FDDC6203A5AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6062ba2a96c54748941103eff9a125ff&contextData=(sc.Default)) on the simple ground that every state enjoyed a degree of authority over its own nationals. Neither the Convention nor the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6062ba2a96c54748941103eff9a125ff&contextData=(sc.Default)) afforded support to the contention that the Foreign Secretary owed a a duty to exercise diplomacy on A's behalf. 

However, the proposition that there was no scope for review of a refusal to render diplomatic assistance to a British subject who was suffering violation of a fundamental human right as the result of the conduct of the authorities of a foreign state was flawed. Policy statements issued by the Foreign Office indicated an acceptance by the government of a role in protecting the rights of British citizens abroad where there was evidence of miscarriage or denial of justice but the expectation which a British subject in A's position could legitimately hold of a response to a request for assistance was limited. 

The response was within the discretion of the Secretary of State. Judicial review would lie if the Foreign Office, contrary to its stated practice, refused even to consider whether to make diplomatic representations. In the instant case, the Foreign Office had considered A's request for assistance. British detainees were the subject of discussions between this country and the United States at Secretary of State and lower official levels. It was not appropriate to order that specific representations be made as that would impact on the conduct of foreign policy. Further the position of the detainees was to be considered by the appellate courts of the United States and the Inter American Commission on Human Rights had taken up the case.