An inmate of Feltham Young Offenders' Institution, Zahid Mubarek, was murdered by his cellmate (a known violent racist) for racially motivated reasons. The House of Lords emphasised the importance of the state's duty to protect life, particularly of those involuntarily in custody. 

The Home Office declined to hold a full public enquiry on the basis that there had been a prison investigation, an enquiry by the Commission for Racial Equality, and a criminal trial. Their lordships re-stated the importance of the state's obligation under article 2 to investigate deaths involving agents of the state.

They pointed out that, while there was no single template for such investigations, there was an irreducible core at the heart of the article 2 duty: the investigation must be public, independent and involve the full participation of the family. Such an investigation had not taken place in this case, and this was therefore seen to represent a violation of article 2.

---

### Summary

An appropriate level of publicity and participation by the deceased's next of kin was required as a minimum standard of review where the state investigated the death of a prisoner in its custody.

### Abstract

An appropriate level of publicity and participation by the deceased's next of kin is required as a minimum standard of review where the state investigates the death of a prisoner in its custody. A, the uncle of an Asian young offender, M, who had been murdered by his cellmate, appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 390, [2003] Q.B. 581) that the state had complied with its duty under the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cb3786b72d554c09a69688b357b0f330&contextData=(sc.Default)) to investigate the circumstances in which the crime came to be committed. The prison service accepted responsibility for M's death, and the cellmate was later convicted of murder. An internal inquiry was held by the prison service, in addition to a police investigation into whether the prison service or any of its employees should be prosecuted. A coroner's inquest was opened but was adjourned pending the cellmate's trial for murder and was never resumed. The Commission for Racial Equality conducted an investigation into racial discrimination in the Prison Service, which made specific reference to the circumstances of M's death. However, A contended that an independent public investigation had to be held in order to satisfy the UK's obligations under Art.2.

Held, allowing the appeal, that whilst it was true that the European Court of Human Rights had not prescribed a single model of investigation to be applied in all cases, it had laid down minimum standards that had to be met, whatever form the investigation took, _[Edwards v United Kingdom (46477/99) (2002) 35 E.H.R.R. 19, [2002] 3 WLUK 399](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA00B17F1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cb3786b72d554c09a69688b357b0f330&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed and _[Jordan v United Kingdom (24746/94) (2003) 37 E.H.R.R. 2, [2001] 5 WLUK 158](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID0E90300E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cb3786b72d554c09a69688b357b0f330&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Whether assessed singly or cumulatively, the investigations conducted into M's death did not satisfy the UK's obligations under Art.2. There had been no inquest to discharge the state's investigative duty. The police investigation raised many unanswered questions and could not discharge the state's duty. The Commission for Racial Equality's investigation was necessarily confined to race related issues and the murder trial had involved little exploration, as could sometimes occur, of wider issues concerning M's death. The prison service's internal inquiry had been conducted by an official who had not enjoyed institutional or hierarchical independence. That inquiry had been conducted in private and the consequent report had not been published. Moreover, M's family had not been able to play an effective part in the inquiry. In order to satisfy Art.2, a full public investigation was required with M's family legally represented, provided with the relevant material and given the opportunity to cross examine witnesses.