### Summary

When considering the concept off a "real risk" of ill treatment pursuant to the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch1. Part I Art.2, where a person is threatened with removal to a country where he alleges he will be at such a risk, the courts should assess the sufficiency of state protection in that country to meet the threat of such a risk.

### Abstract

Mr and Mrs B appealed against the dismissal ([2003] EWHC 854) of their applications for judicial review of the Secretary of State's certification under the [Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 s.115(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA757D9C0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default)) of their claims for asylum under the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default)) as "clearly unfounded". Mr and Mrs B were Lithuanian citizens who claimed that because of Mr B's Roma origins they had suffered persistent harassment and violence from members of the Lithuanian Mafia. They contended that the police did not offer effective protection because of corruption, complicity, or inertia. The Secretary of State considered that there had been no breach of the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment contained in Art.3 because the alleged conduct did not reach the required threshold of seriousness, and because there was sufficiency of state protection in Lithuania. The central issue on appeal was whether Mr and Mrs B were entitled to resist removal to Lithuania on Art.3 grounds on the basis that, however good a system of protection was provided there, there was still a real risk to them, if returned, of Art.3 ill treatment from law breakers.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that the concept of risk of exposure to Art.3 ill treatment meant a "well founded fear", and the threshold of risk required to engage Art.3 depended on the circumstances of each case, _[R. (on the application of Dhima) v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2002] EWHC 80 (Admin), [2002] Imm. A.R. 394, [2002] 2 WLUK 115](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I790BEB60E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _Secretary of State for the Home Department v Krepel [2002] EWCA Civ 1265_ applied, and _[Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1 A.C. 489, [2000] 7 WLUK 99](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC3AFD970E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. An assessment of the threshold of risk appropriate in the circumstances to engage Art.3 involved an assessment of the sufficiency of state protection to meet the threat of which there was a risk: one could not be considered without the other, Dhima considered, Krepel and _[Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 74, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 1891, [2002] 1 WLUK 679](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC6CF9A90E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. "Sufficiency" of state protection did not mean a guarantee of protection from Art.3 ill treatment, nor did it mean the eradication or removal of any risk of such ill treatment, Dhima considered, _[McPherson v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ 1955, [2002] I.N.L.R. 139, [2001] 12 WLUK 527](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF83C2680E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Krepel applied. Where the risk fell to be judged by the sufficiency of state protection, that sufficiency was to be judged according to whether it was a reasonable provision in the circumstances, _[Osman v United Kingdom (23452/94) [1999] 1 F.L.R. 193, [1998] 10 WLUK 513](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I14AEDD80E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=02e6ee79903f40b397ca97b1e4668ddf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The consideration of whether an application was "clearly unfounded" started and finished with the assessment of risk in the country to which the applicant would ultimately be returned.