### Summary

Decisions to continue to segregate two prisoners had been unlawful, as they had not been authorised by the secretary of state and were unfair at common law. Any purported performance of his function under the [Prison Rules 1999 r.45(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1AA6FE0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)) by a governor or other prison officer could not be treated as performance by him.

### Abstract

The appellant life-sentence prisoners (B and H) convicted of terrorist offences appealed against a decision ([2012] EWCA Civ 376, 2012] 1 W.L.R. 3602) that their segregation by prison operational managers for seven and six months respectively had been lawful.

Each had been segregated under the [Prison Act 1952](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60A05700E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)), the [Prison Rules 1999 r.45](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1AA6FE0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)), and the non-statutory Prison Service Order 1700 issued by the secretary of state, and the segregation renewed every 14 days by a Segregation Review Board (SRB). Rule [45(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1AA6FE0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)) restricted segregation to 72 hours without the authority of a visitor or the secretary of state, and PSO 1700 gave authority for operational managers to renew month by month or for 14 days. Reasons given for the continued fortnightly renewal of B's segregation were to investigate his alleged involvement in a serious assault, that he posed a threat to good order and discipline, that he was being referred to the Close Supervision Centre, and that a transfer to another prison was pending. The month after his segregation began the police dismissed him as a suspect in the assault. In response to his judicial review proceedings, the secretary of state alleged that he had been intimidating other prisoners to change faith and cited new evidence about the assault, but the assault allegations were dropped as unsubstantiated. After the seven months B was transferred to normal conditions in another prison. H was segregated under r.45 after his alleged involvement in the serious injury of another prisoner. The defence to his judicial review proceedings included an allegation, later withdrawn, that H was converting other segregated prisoners to his version of Islam. After six months H was moved to another prison. The issues in each case were whether (i) the segregation was lawful; (ii) the procedure was fair under common law.

The appellants submitted that the continued segregation was unlawful, having been ordered by an operational manager without the authority of the secretary of state as stipulated by [r.45(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1AA6FE0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)). The respondent argued that the principle in _[Carltona Ltd v Commissioners of Works [1943] 2 All E.R. 560, [1943] 10 WLUK 5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF7186580E57011DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied whereby a departmental official's decision was constitutionally that of the secretary of state.

### Held

Appeals allowed.

(1) Rule [45(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1AA6FE0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [r.45(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1AA6FE0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default)) were clear that segregation was to be arranged and might be ended by "the governor" and r.45(2) that 72 hours was the maximum permitted without authority from the secretary of state. Prison governors or officials held an independent statutory office, and as such exercised powers vested in them personally by virtue of their office. They were constitutionally responsible for the manner of its discharge and the Carltona principle could not apply to them while they were so acting, _[Carltona Ltd v Commissioners of Works [1943] 2 All E.R. 560, [1943] 10 WLUK 5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF7186580E57011DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished (see paras [43-50, 55, 64](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). Any purported performance of the secretary of state's function under r.45(2) by a governor or other prison officer could not be treated as performance by the secretary of state, and the latter's purported delegation of his function under r.45(2) to the chairman of the SRB in terms of the PSO 1700 was unlawful (paras [90,127](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) Segregation decisions concerned judgments of risk to prison order and discipline and were not about the facts of a particular event. Fairness at common law required that prisoners should usually have a meaningful opportunity to make representations before a decision was made by the secretary of state under r.45(2) considering the serious consequences of further segregation for 14 days, the fact that authority would be sought on the basis of information about him, especially about his and others' conduct, the value of his answers to allegations or information he would give, and the common law insistence that the exercise of administrative power should be fair, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, [1993] 6 WLUK 233](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65782B90E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Reilly's Application for Judicial Review, Re [2013] UKSC 61, [2014] A.C. 1115, [2013] 10 WLUK 277](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0086AB0030E011E3AC51CABC0E2C66BF/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed, _[R. v Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison Ex p. Hague [1990] 3 W.L.R. 1210, [1990] 5 WLUK 346](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3F7D1E00E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f07c4a7ceda4222a659e9d0c7a2491d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled in part (paras [92-99](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). In the cases of H and B, either no or insufficient information was provided regarding central aspects of the basis of their segregation, even taking account of the need to protect the safety of others or prison security. The gist of the reasons in general terms was required (paras [100-103](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).