### Summary

A patient did not have capacity to refuse consent to treatment where he did not believe that he was or might be mentally ill in circumstances where such a fact was central to his ability to use and weigh in the balance the relevant information concerning that treatment in reaching a decision as to whether or not to accept it. Strictly, it was only when any medical treatment proposed reached the appropriate degree of severity to engage the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.3 that the question of the requirement to convincingly show medical or therapeutic necessity arose. The test of therapeutic or medical necessity was not applicable to a consideration of justification for interference with a patient's rights under Sch.1 Part I Art.8(2).

### Abstract

The claimant (B) sought judicial review of a decision to give him treatment to which he refused to consent. B was detained under the [Mental Health Act 1983](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60244931E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1d0e5adbdc5437db137551f35184a35&contextData=(sc.Default)) . The first and second defendants (S and G) wished to treat him with anti- psychotic drugs. B refused consent. S and G considered that B did not have capacity to make the decision. Accordingly, they sought and authorised compulsory treatment under s.58(3) of the Act. B argued that 

(1) he had the capacity to refuse medical treatment; 

(2) the compulsory treatment proposed engaged the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1d0e5adbdc5437db137551f35184a35&contextData=(sc.Default)) and therefore could only be justified if it met the test in _[Herczegfalvy v Austria (A/242-B) (1993) 15 E.H.R.R. 437, [1992] 9 WLUK 129](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBFA72270E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1d0e5adbdc5437db137551f35184a35&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , namely that it had been convincingly shown that there was a therapeutic or medical necessity for it, which was not indicated by the evidence; 

(3) the proposed treatment interfered with his rights under Art.8 and was not permitted under Art.8(2). The test in Herczegfalvy applied to Art.8 as it did to Art.3 such that a therapeutic or medical necessity was required to be convincingly shown.

Held, refusing the application, that 

(1) B did not have capacity to refuse medical treatment. B was able to comprehend and retain information concerning his proposed treatment. However, B did not believe that he was or might be mentally ill. The fact of his illness was a cornerstone of the factors to be taken into account in considering the information about his proposed treatment. It followed that B was not able to use and weigh in the balance the relevant information concerning that treatment in reaching a decision as to whether or not to accept it. 

(2) Art.3 was not engaged. It was not the case that the mere fact that compulsory treatment was capable of reaching the Art.3 threshold meant that it could only be justified if it met the test in Herczegfalvy , Herczegfalvy considered. Strictly, it was only when what was proposed reached the appropriate degree of severity to engage Art.3 that the question of medical or therapeutic necessity arose. The determination of that question was for the court itself and in so doing it was quite proper for the court to place particular weight on the evidence of the responsible medical officer and the second appointed doctor. The relevance of their day to day experience as to the nature and extent of any relevant medical dispute was an important consideration in deciding between competing arguments. In the instant case it was unlikely that B would physically resist treatment and it was unclear whether his continued objection to it would cause him marked distress. It was hoped that the proposed treatment would enable B to reach capacitated decisions which could include a continued refusal of treatment. In those circumstances, it was unlikely that compulsory administration of an anti psychotic drug would result in intense physical or mental suffering sufficient to engage Art.3. 

(3) The test in the case of Herczegfalvy did not apply to Art.8 and a therapeutic or medical necessity was not required to be convincingly shown. The European Court of Human Rights did not state that that was the case and there was no other authority to support that proposition. The justification for an interference with rights under Art.8(1) by reason of medical treatment turned on the application of the orthodox three stage test in Art.8(2). However, the parties had proceeded on the basis that if the court was satisfied that it had been convincingly shown that that the proposed treatment was a therapeutic or medical necessity all the elements of Art.8(2) would be satisfied. The evidence indicated that there were sound and compelling reasons to believe that the treatment would achieve many or all of its purposes to a significant degree. In all the circumstances the proposed treatment was a therapeutic or medical necessity.