### Summary

The Crown was not bound by the prohibition on smoking in public places contained in the [Health Act 2006 Pt 1 Ch.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FCE9020231D11DB8CB7BD28471A0A47/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default)), meaning that state-run prisons were not obliged to apply the ban. There was a presumption that Acts of Parliament only bound the Crown by express words or "necessary implication", but there were powerful indicators in the language of the Act that the Crown was not to be bound by the ban.

### Abstract

A prisoner appealed against a decision that Crown premises were not covered by the prohibition on smoking in most enclosed public places and workplaces contained in the [Health Act 2006 Pt 1 Ch.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FCE9020231D11DB8CB7BD28471A0A47/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default)), meaning that state-run prisons were not obliged to apply the ban.

The prisoner was detained in a state-run prison. He asserted that the ban was not being enforced properly in common parts of the prison. However, the secretary of state refused his request for the National Health Service Smoke-free Compliance Line to be put on the prison phone system, to enable prisoners to report breaches of the smoking ban to the local authorities charged with enforcing it. The prisoner was successful in an application for judicial review of that decision, but the Court of Appeal reversed that decision, finding that the Act did not bind the Crown.

There was no dispute that a smoking ban was in place in the prison, but the issue was whether the prison was bound by Pt 1 Ch.1 so that the ban was backed up by criminal sanctions and other enforcement measures.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

**What test should be applied in deciding whether a statute bound the Crown?** The classic and conventional statement of principle was that a presumption existed that a statutory provision did not bind the Crown save by express words or "necessary implication", _[Bombay Province v Bombay Municipal Corp [1947] A.C. 58, [1946] 10 WLUK 9](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I767138C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Lord Advocate v Dumbarton DC [1990] 2 A.C. 580, [1989] 11 WLUK 394](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE34A0F30E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (see para.[22](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Should the classic presumption be revisited?** No. It was easy to see the merits of reversing the presumption, so that the Crown would be bound unless expressly excluded from the Act's provisions. However, the presumption was so well established that many statutes had been drafted on the basis that the Crown was not bound except by express words or necessary implication. Decisions of the court generally operated retrospectively. It might be possible for the court to declare that a new understanding of the law would operate only prospectively, but that would be wholly exceptional and no case for doing so had been made. The instant court therefore declined to abolish the rule or reverse the presumption, but urged Parliament to consider doing so (paras [33-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Should the test be modified?** It was open to the court to clarify the test. Some simple propositions applied. The Crown was not bound by a statutory provision except by express words or necessary implication. That was not an immunity from liability, but a rule of statutory interpretation. The goal of statutory interpretation was to discover the legislation's intention. That intention was to be gathered from the words used, considered in the light of their context and purpose. It was not enough that the legislation would be more beneficial for the public if the Crown were bound. However, it was not necessary that the purpose of the legislation would be "wholly frustrated" if the Crown were not bound, Bombay Province considered, _[R. (on the application of Revenue and Customs Commissioners) v HM Coroner for Liverpool [2014] EWHC 1586 (Admin), [2015] Q.B. 481, [2014] 5 WLUK 682](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I984A6870E1AA11E395659D6C6D54E762/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved. It was permissible to consider the extent to which the Crown was likely to voluntarily take action to achieve the purpose of the Act without being bound. It might be that the Act's purpose could as well be achieved by the Crown exercising its powers in the public interest. If it could not, that was a factor to be taken into account in determining the legislative intent. It was neither necessary nor desirable to add further glosses to the test (paras [36-37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**How should the test be applied in the instant case?** Some strong points could be made in favour of concluding that Parliament meant the Crown to be bound by the smoking ban. There had been no hint in the government publications leading up to the adoption of the policy that the Crown would not be bound. Omitting Crown premises would deny statutory protection to large numbers of people. Further, prisons were expressly mentioned in [s.3(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I24EB10F022BD11DB801C928704B2506D/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act and no reason had been given for distinguishing between state and private prisons. Against those arguments, however, there were powerful indicators in the language of the Act that the Crown was not to be bound. First, the Act did not say that the Crown was bound, although it would have been easy to do so. Second, in statutes with comparable structures and enforcement powers, there were provisions dealing expressly with the extent to which the statute was to apply to the Crown. Indeed, [s.23](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6BBE046022BD11DB801C928704B2506D/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 2006 Act contained a provision expressly stating that the Crown was bound by [Pt 3 Ch.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9FCF5370231D11DB8CB7BD28471A0A47/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54f51c024d394d2ba1a58479a83a727e&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act. It was also clear from a report of the House of Commons Health Committee that Parliament had been alive to the question of whether the smoking ban would bind the Crown. It might well be thought desirable if the ban bound the Crown, but the legislation was workable without that and the Crown could do a lot voluntarily. "Necessary implication" entailed that Parliament had to intend to bind the Crown. In the 2006 Act, Parliament had said so when it meant to bind the Crown and that was conclusive of the question. With considerable reluctance, the court concluded that the appeal had to fail (paras [12-13, 20, 38-40, 42-50](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).