### Summary

Anti-social behaviour orders (ASBO) - Power of Chief Constable to apply for ASBOs and duty of consultation with other relevant authorities - Judge was wrong to hold that functions of Chief Constable could not be delegated to officers below rank of superintendent - Functions of Chief Constable could be delegated where delegation was consistent with statutory purpose and person to whom delegated was suitable - Judge should not have dismissed applications for ASBOs as null and void for irregularities - Crime and Disorder Act 1998 s 1(1), (2).

### Abstract

The Chief Constable sought judicial review of the dismissal by a district judge of his applications, made through his officers, under the [Crime and Disorder Act 1998 s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I40962190E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=def7679131a048a399f0190875810330&contextData=(sc.Default)) for anti social behaviour orders against five young boys. The applications had been dismissed as null and void on the grounds that the power of a Chief Constable to make applications for such orders could not be delegated to an officer of lower rank than superintendent and that consultation under s.1(2) of the Act had to be carried out by an officer of the same rank as superintendent.

Held, granting the application, that a Chief Constable was entitled to delegate to his officers his power under s.1 of the Act to consult a local authority and bring an application for an anti social behaviour order. A Chief Constable was not the employer of the officers under his command, although he was legally answerable for them; the principle that a ministerial departmental head was responsible for things done under his authority was applicable, _[Carltona Ltd v Commissioners of Works [1943] 2 All E.R. 560, [1943] 10 WLUK 5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF7186580E57011DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=def7679131a048a399f0190875810330&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. There were two qualifications to this principle in that delegation had to be to someone suitable and there would be occasions when delegation would not be appropriate. A Chief Constable's powers were likely to be delegable save for the most important functions. It was for the Chief Constable to decide who was the person most appropriate to carry out consultation and apply for anti social behaviour orders and the court could not interfere with his choices unless they were irrational or beyond his powers.