### Summary

The court stressed the importance of avoiding litigation in disputes between public authorities and members of the public and held that it should use its powers under the Civil Procedure Rules 1998 to ensure that such disputes were resolved with the minimum of judicial intervention.

### Abstract

C appealed against the refusal ([2001] EWHC Admin 734) of his application for judicial review of the council's decision to close the residential home in which he was a resident. C sought to have the decision to close the home quashed and an order requiring the council to follow Government guidelines relating to the assessment of the community care needs of the residents and the preparation of care plans. C contended that, as a matter of law, such assessments were required to be carried out before a decision was made to close a home. The council had indicated a willingness to deal with the issues by way of a statutory complaints procedure which C contended was an inadequate alternative to judicial review.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that there was no legal principle in issue. It was of paramount importance that litigation should be avoided in disputes between public authorities and members of the public wherever possible, and it was the duty of the courts to use their powers under the [Civil Procedure Rules 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I71F54A60E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=143968e579da495bb5ef95af60daab98&contextData=(sc.Default)) to ensure that such disputes were resolved with the minimum of judicial intervention. To this end, an inter partes hearing might be required to establish whether a complaints procedure or other form of alternative dispute resolution could be used, either to resolve the dispute or at least reduce the issues involved. In the instant case, the 1998 Rules did not confer upon the parties any right to judicial review in the absence of an adequate alternative procedure which would have the same effect and could take place outside the litigation process. It was clear that an assessment was required, but that the council had failed to clarify its strategy in this regard.