### Summary

Applicant sought advisory declaration that UN Resolution 1441 did not authorise states to take military action in event of non-compliance by Iraq - Court would not declare interpretation of international treaty - Court would not rule on foreign affairs and deployment of armed forces which were exclusive responsibility of executive - Good reason needed to make advisory declaration - Declaration in this case contrary to national interest.

### Abstract

CND sought an advisory declaration as to the true meaning of Resolution 1441 of the United Nations Security Council dated November 8, 2002 particularly as to whether it authorised states to take military action in the event of non compliance by Iraq with its terms. Resolution 1441 was the ultimatum in respect of disarmament that led to the return of the weapons inspectors to Iraq. CND argued that the resolution did not authorise military action and that the UK government would be acting in breach of international law were it to take military action against Iraq without a further resolution. It referred to government statements which it claimed indicated that the government apparently believed that military action would be lawful without a second resolution. CND claimed that the sole purpose of the application was to ensure that the government did not at some future date embark upon military action against Iraq in the mistaken belief that it was lawful to do so when in fact it was not. The preliminary issues considered justiciability, prematurity and standing, but not the substantive point of international law at issue. The defendants asserted that the subject matter of the claim namely, foreign affairs and the deployment of armed forces was not justiciable.

Held, refusing the application, that 

(1) the court had no jurisdiction to declare the true interpretation of an international instrument that had not been incorporated into English domestic law and which it was unnecessary to interpret for the purposes of determining a person's rights or duties under domestic law, _[R. (on the application of Adan (Lul Omar)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 2 A.C. 477, [2000] 12 WLUK 509](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74E32940E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ad3035bbaae4b088e335c2e80379197&contextData=(sc.Search))_ , _[Oppenheimer v Cattermole (Inspector of Taxes) [1976] A.C. 249, [1975] 2 WLUK 10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1448C8B0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ad3035bbaae4b088e335c2e80379197&contextData=(sc.Search))_ , _[R. (on the application of Abbasi) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2002] EWCA Civ 1598, [2003] U.K.H.R.R. 76, [2002] 11 WLUK 114](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74DC9991E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ad3035bbaae4b088e335c2e80379197&contextData=(sc.Search))_ , _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Launder (No.2) [1997] 1 W.L.R. 839, [1997] 5 WLUK 399](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I658C4FD0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ad3035bbaae4b088e335c2e80379197&contextData=(sc.Search))_ , _[R. v DPP Ex p. Kebeline [2000] 2 A.C. 326, [1999] 10 WLUK 909](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4264D4A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ad3035bbaae4b088e335c2e80379197&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[R. v Lyons (Isidore Jack) (No.3) [2002] UKHL 44, [2003] 1 A.C. 976, [2002] 11 WLUK 422](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I56497390E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7ad3035bbaae4b088e335c2e80379197&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered; 

(2) the court would in any event decline to embark upon the determination of an issue if to do so would be damaging to the public interest in the field of international relations, national security or defence. The substantive question raised by this application was non-justiciable; 

(3) even if this claim were not barred by the above considerations it would still be rejected on the ground that advisory declarations should not be made save for demonstrably good reason. Here there was none. There was no sound basis for believing the government to have been wrongly advised as to the true position in international law. Nor in any event could there be any question here of declaring illegal whatever decision or action might hereafter be taken in light of the UK's understanding of its position in international law; 

(4) because of the obvious importance of the issues before the court and the skill and cogency of CND's arguments, permission to apply would be granted and the substantive claim dismissed, and 

(5) prematurity and standing would not have stood in the way of the claim had it been a sound one.