### Summary

The Revenue's guidance in para.2.7 to para.2.9 of the 1999 edition of IR20 succeeded in conveying to the ordinarily sophisticated taxpayer the fact that the Revenue required a distinct break in the pattern of the taxpayer's life in the United Kingdom in order to find the taxpayer no longer resident or ordinarily resident in the UK. The guidance did not give rise to a legitimate expectation that a more benevolent interpretation would be applied to the determination of the taxpayer's status.

### Abstract

The first appellant taxpayers (D) and second appellant taxpayer (G) appealed against a refusal (_[[2010] EWCA Civ 83, [2010] S.T.C. 860](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA8A40B001B7911DF9B339E25ECDD56B0/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5a47ca5d9434ef09a0b224bab541457&contextData=(sc.Default))_) of their application for judicial review of determinations made by the respondent commissioners based upon their interpretation of the guidance in relation to the residence and ordinary residence of individuals published in the 1999 edition of their booklet IR20.

D challenged the commissioners' finding that they had been resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom for the tax year 2001-2002. G challenged a decision that he had been resident and ordinarily resident from tax year 1993-1994 to 2003-2004. The 1999 edition of IR20 had been operative until 2009.

D and G argued that on its proper construction, IR20 contained a more benevolent interpretation of the circumstances in which an individual became non-resident than was reflected in the ordinary law, so as to give rise to a legitimate expectation that that interpretation would be applied; if that was wrong, they argued that the commissioners' settled practice had been to apply that interpretation, so that legitimate expectation arose. D argued as a preliminary point that para.2.9 of IR20 described a route to non-residence independent of para.2.8, and they had fulfilled that route.

### Held

Appeals dismissed.

(Lord Mance, J.S.C. dissenting) (1) The exposition in IR20 of how to achieve non-resident status should have been much clearer. However, when all of the relevant passages were considered together, it informed the ordinarily sophisticated taxpayer that: he was required to leave the UK in a more profound sense than that of travel, namely permanently or indefinitely or for full-time employment; he was required to do more than take up residence abroad; he was required to relinquish his usual residence in the UK; any subsequent returns to the UK were required to be no more than visits; and any property retained in the UK for his use was required to be used for the purpose only of visits rather than as a place of residence. The taxpayer would have concluded that those general requirements in principle demanded a multifactorial evaluation of his circumstances on the commissioners' part. He might reasonably have summarised what the booklet required as "a distinct break", as required by the ordinary law. If it was wrong to conclude that IR20 succeeded in conveying that information, it could only be concluded that IR20's treatment of the means of becoming non-resident was so unclear as to communicate nothing to which legal effect might be given, whereas legitimate expectation had to be founded on clearly specified criteria (see paras [45, 47](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) D and G had failed to establish that by their inquiries and determinations in respect of them, the commissioners departed from a settled practice such as to found a legitimate expectation. The facts showed that scrutiny of claims to non-residence had become more frequent, but when, previously, claims had been scrutinised, it could not be said on the evidence that the commissioners had adopted a settled practice of applying criteria different from those identified in both law and IR20 read as a whole (para.[58](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) As a matter of construction, D's contention that para.2.9 was independent of para.2.8 was patently incorrect. It was grouped with para.2.8 and para.2.7 under the same heading and its wording made an express link with para.2.8. The three paragraphs had to be read compendiously (paras [41-42](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) In order to become non-resident or to avoid being deemed to be resident, the ordinary law required a UK resident to effect a distinct break in the pattern of his life in the UK. That requirement mandated a multifactorial inquiry. However, the Court of Appeal's references in the instant case to a need for "severance of social and family ties" pitched the requirement at too high a level. The distinct break encompassed a loosening of such ties, but the allowance of limited visits to the UK on the taxpayer's part foreshadowed their continued existence (para.[20](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).