### Summary

The [Parole Board Rules 2016 r.25(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I06E14480A17911E6AF48D197B7E94387/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)), which prohibited making information public about Parole Board proceedings, was too broad and was ultra vires the rule-making power set out in the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 Pt 12 s.239(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F0BA220E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)). The Board's decision directing the release of a Category A prisoner serving an indeterminate sentence was irrational, as it should have undertaken further inquiry into the circumstances of his offending, and in particular the fact that he had admitted only to the 12 sexual offences of which he had been convicted, when there were references in the dossier to "80+ potential victims" and a key issue leading to the release decision was his openness and honesty. The further inquiry would have allowed the Board to test his account.

### Abstract

The claimants applied for judicial review of the defendant Parole Board's decision to direct the release of the interested party prisoner (R), and challenged the [Parole Board Rules 2016 r.25(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I06E14480A17911E6AF48D197B7E94387/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)) which prohibited making information about Board proceedings public.

R had been a taxi driver. He was convicted of serious sexual offences involving 12 victims and given an indeterminate sentence with an eight-year minimum term. He maintained his innocence for six years, then admitted to the offences, with the exception of assault by penetration. He stated that the trigger for his offending had been a breakup in 2006. He sought a parole hearing. The Board had reports from several psychologists supporting R's release. Its dossier had police material referring to "80+ potential victims" including some before 2006; R had only been charged with index offences. He had settled large civil claims with other alleged victims, without admitting liability, and further victims had sued the police: that claim, _[DSD v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2014] EWHC 436 (QB), [2014] 2 WLUK 990](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3C7AE040A0D911E3AF7AFAFF7606735F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default))_, which found that R had committed over 100 rapes and sexual assaults beginning in 2003, was referred to but not in the dossier. The Board directed R's release. Under r.25(1), its reasons were not publicised. Two victims, the Mayor of London, and a newspaper publisher applied for judicial review of the decision; the mayor's standing was in issue.

The claimants submitted that (1) the Board's decision was irrational in itself, and it should have undertaken further inquiry into other potential offending and taken the other material into account; (2) r.25(1) was ultra vires.

### Held

Application granted.

**Standing -** The mayor had no standing. His statutory functions did not relate to the Board's decisions. His position was no different from other politicians or the public. Denying him standing would not disable the court from performing its function: the secretary of state, as a party, was a natural claimant, and the victims' standing had not been challenged (see paras [109-111](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Irrationality -** Risk evaluation was central to the Board's judicial function and was partly inquisitorial. The Board had to proactively examine all available evidence and submissions. Its statutory question was whether a prisoner's continued confinement was no longer necessary for public protection. There was force in the irrationality submissions: it was very rare for a Category A prisoner to be released with no intervening periods at lower categorisation, and there were striking feature's including R's admissions after six years of maintaining his innocence. The psychologists did not seem to have thoroughly probed the possibility that he was not being honest. The Board did not ask R questions directed to his credibility. However, its decision, though surprising, was not irrational of itself. The Board gave clear reasons and was aware it was taking an unorthodox step (paras [116-117, 123-133](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Relevant considerations -** The [Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.28(6)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6652EDA0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not expressly state factors the Board was required to consider in all cases. Undertaking further inquiry was not a legal obligation in all cases. However, the Board, like a sentencing judge, had considerable latitude regarding the range of information to consider, subject to fairness, _[R. v Considine (Lawrence Philip) [2007] EWCA Crim 1166, [2008] 1 W.L.R. 414, [2007] 6 WLUK 60](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I80CA82911AF411DCA106B36EB4941866/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of McGetrick) v Parole Board for England and Wales [2012] EWHC 882 (Admin), [2012] 1 W.L.R. 2488, [2012] 4 WLUK 149](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9CA374807EAF11E1BB69D79D4EB7FD56/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. It was not precluded from considering evidence of wider offending. In the instant case it ought to have carried out further inquiry. It had not taken into account the references to "80+ potential victims". Its reasons were directed only at the admitted index offences. There was reason to doubt R's explanations. A key issue was whether R was being open and honest. Further inquiry would have revealed that R had settled civil claims with other alleged victims. The material would have allowed testing of his account. It should have been obtained, and was so obviously material that it would have to be considered. The release direction was quashed (paras [141-146, 150-151, 154-164](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Vires of r.25 -** The open justice principle did not apply to tribunals which were not courts, but the Board exercised the judicial power of the state. It determined whether prisoners should remain confined after the expiry of their minimum terms. Adjudications on individual liberty were judicial functions. Open justice might require some information about private hearings being made public, _[Kennedy v Information Commissioner [2014] UKSC 20, [2015] A.C. 455, [2014] 3 WLUK 755](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I15B03E80B4E111E3AB12840362EEA953/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. There was no reason it should not apply to the Board in the context of providing information on matters of public concern to the public, while protecting a prisoner's [ECHR art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)) rights. As a judicial body the Board was required by [r.24(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4EF4F550A17911E6AF48D197B7E94387/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)) to provide reasons for its decisions to the parties. The victims were not seeking access through r.24 as they were not parties; their starting point was that they had standing to bring judicial review proceedings, and a rule existed which wrongly prevented the Board from giving them any information about the proceedings. The right to information, which flowed from the right of access to the court, was not absolute, but r.25 disentitled the victims to any information. The victims' right of access to the court entitled them to be given some information about the substance of the release decision. The [Criminal Justice Act 2003 Pt 12 s.239(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F0BA220E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0078aabe6b134c2398eaedad47f9d240&contextData=(sc.Default)), setting out the rule-making power for the Board, contained general and ambiguous words which did not authorise trammelling fundamental rights. It permitted proceedings in private where necessary, and the withholding of confidential information. However, r.25(1) was so broad that it embraced non-confidential information and information which could be presented in a way that respected individual rights. It was not objectively necessary and was ultra vires s.239(5) (paras [171, 174-177, 183-187, 191-200](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).