#key-case 

This case began with a request by a journalist, Rob Evans, under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) for copies of Prince Charles' correspondence lobbying various government agencies. (These were known as the 'black spider memos' on account of his handwriting).

The government departments refused to disclose the letters on the ground that they considered them exempt from disclosure under the FOIA. However, a court of law, the Upper Tribunal, determined after extensive deliberation that many of the letters, referred to as 'advocacy correspondence', should be disclosed.

The Attorney General subsequently issued a certificate, under section 53(2) of the FOIA, effectively overriding the Upper Tribunal's judicial decision. Evans sought judicial review of the Attorney General's decision to issue the section 53 certificate. The case reached the Supreme Court, which found against the Attorney General.

The Supreme Court considered that the Attorney General's conduct had "contradicted the fundamental principle that a court's decision could not be ignored or set aside by anyone, including the executive, and that the executive's actions were reviewable by the court".

---

### Summary

The [Freedom of Information Act 2000 s.53](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I37D4AE60E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not entitle an accountable person to issue a certificate to override a court's decision that information should be disclosed simply because he disagreed with its conclusion. Accordingly, the Attorney General had not been entitled to issue a s.53 certificate to override an Upper Tribunal decision that communications between the Prince of Wales and government departments should be disclosed.

### Abstract

The Attorney General appealed against a decision (_[[2014] EWCA Civ 254, [2014] Q.B. 855](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I198CB710A9F911E39C978A2026B44B2D/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default))_) quashing a certificate he had issued under the [Freedom of Information Act 2000 s.53](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I37D4AE60E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)) to override an Upper Tribunal decision that communications between the Prince of Wales and government departments should be disclosed.

The government had refused a journalist's request to disclose the information; the Information Commissioner had upheld that refusal. The Upper Tribunal ruled that some communications should be disclosed. As an "accountable person" within [s.53(8)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I37D4AE60E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)), the Attorney General issued a certificate under [s.53(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I37D4AE60E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)) on the basis of constitutional conventions concerning the Prince's role as future King. 

The Court of Appeal upheld the journalist's application for judicial review of the certificate on the basis that 
(i) the Attorney's reasons were not capable of constituting "reasonable grounds" within s.53(2); 
(ii) because the correspondence concerned environmental issues, the certificate was incompatible with [Directive 2003/4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA8EB14478BA641F382BDA64E40F46302/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)) on access to environmental information.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(Lord Wilson dissenting, Lord Hughes dissenting on s.53 issue but concurring on environmental information issue)

(1) (Per Lords Neuberger, Kerr and Reed) To decide the extent to which a decision-maker was bound by a conclusion reached by an adjudicative tribunal in a related context, regard had to be had to the circumstances and the statutory scheme within which the tribunal reached its conclusion and the decision-maker carried out his function. In particular, the court would have regard to the nature of the conclusion, the status of the tribunal and the decision-maker, the procedure by which the tribunal and decision-maker reached their conclusions, and the role of the tribunal and the decision-maker within the statutory scheme, _[R. (on the application of Bradley) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2008] EWCA Civ 36, [2009] Q.B. 114, [2008] 2 WLUK 150](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5F8BE420D60B11DCBAF4DAAE9FFF3D9C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. 

The accountable person could not justify issuing a s.53 certificate simply on the ground that he had reached a different conclusion to the Upper Tribunal on a [s.57](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I37D79491E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)) appeal. ==First, that contradicted the fundamental principles that a court's decision could not be ignored or set aside by anyone, including the executive, and that the executive's actions were reviewable by the court. Second, the earlier conclusion was reached by a tribunal whose decision could be appealed, which had relevant expertise, which conducted a full, public hearing, and which produced a closely-reasoned decision, whereas the later conclusion was reached by an individual, who consulted people involved on at least one side of the correspondence, received no argument on behalf of the person seeking disclosure, received no fresh evidence, and simply took a different view.== It was necessary to consider the circumstances in which a s.53 certificate could be issued after a tribunal had issued a decision notice. Although it was very unlikely that new evidence would be available to the accountable person, given that a s.53 certificate had to be issued within 20 days, it was by no means impossible. 

It would also be possible to issue a certificate if the tribunal made a demonstrably flawed determination which could not be the subject matter of an appeal. The court's conclusion resulted in s.53 having a very narrow range of application, and the position of the s.53 power regarding a determination of the Information Commissioner rather than a court or tribunal was unsatisfactory; however, it had always been envisaged that s.53 would be rarely invoked, and the co-existence of the executive's s.53 power and its appeal right gave rise to problems on any view (see paras [66-70, 75-78, 86](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (Per Lord Mance and Lady Hale) The Attorney General had to be able to assert that he had reasonable grounds for considering that disclosure was not due. That was a higher hurdle than mere rationality. Disagreement with the tribunal would require the clearest possible justification (paras [129-130](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(2) (Per Lords Neuberger, Kerr, Reed, Mance and Hughes and Lady Hale) The court's conclusion on s.53 meant it was not necessary to consider the environmental issue. Had the certificate been valid under the Act, it would still have breached the Directive. [Article 6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA8EB14478BA641F382BDA64E40F46302/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=549ccf6246a04a38b9f82c74c1c0ed9a&contextData=(sc.Default)) required a person refused environmental information to have access to a tribunal which could review the refusal and whose decisions could become final. It was inconsistent with art.6 for the executive to have the right to override the judicial decision (paras [100-103](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Contrary to the Court of Appeal's view, reading the whole of the Attorney's reasoning in the certificate, it was obvious that he would have granted a certificate in respect of non-environmental information in the correspondence even if the environmental information had to be disclosed. Accordingly, the breach of the Directive would not have invalidated the certificate in relation to non-environmental information (paras [111-112](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) (Per Lord Wilson) The majority judgments rewrote, rather than interpreted, s.53. The section did in principle entitle the Attorney to override the tribunal's evaluation of public interests. The Attorney's grounds had been reasonable. There had been no breach of art.6 of the Directive. The appeal to the tribunal fulfilled art.6's requirements. The certificate did not alter that: judicial review of the certificate meant that the final arbiter was a court of law (paras [168-189](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).