The case concerned the funding of care for residents in care homes who required a mixture of NHS-funded care and local authority means-tested care, with contributions payable by the resident or their family. It was held that the Health Board’s application of the rules under s. 49 had been too restrictive. The NHS funds should also have covered care provided by registered nurses that was ancillary to or closely connected with the nursing care that had to be provided by the NHS. This amounted to an error of law, therefore.

---

### Summary

Decisions taken by local health boards in Wales in respect of the provision of funding for registered nursing care in care homes had been based on a misinterpretation of the [Health and Social Care Act 2001 s.49(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I81CCFDB1E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b04aa8164822493dad67a8e18df0ab49&contextData=(sc.Default)). The proper construction of "nursing care by a registered nurse" in s.49(2) was that there would be some circumstances in which care needed to be provided by a registered nurse, even though it was not care which only a registered nurse could provide.

### Abstract

The appellant local authorities appealed against a decision concerning the funding of care provision carried out by registered nurses in care homes.

In general, health care was provided or arranged by the NHS and was free irrespective of means, while social care was provided or arranged by local authorities with means-tested contributions made for some or all of that care. The instant case raised the question of who was legally responsible for paying for work carried out by registered nurses in social rather than health care settings. Based on a survey which asked nurses to record and categorise time spent on different tasks, the health boards had decided that time spent on certain tasks did not fall within the definition of "nursing care by a registered nurse" in the [Health and Social Care Act 2001 s.49(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I81CCFDB1E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b04aa8164822493dad67a8e18df0ab49&contextData=(sc.Default)). They reduced the payments made to the care homes. That decision was challenged by the operators of care homes in Wales. The local authorities were joined as interested parties, and had effectively taken over conduct of the case from the care home operators. They contended that the NHS, through the local health boards, was required to fund the full cost of a registered nurse's presence in a care home, and that the health boards had adopted too restrictive an interpretation of s.49(2). The health boards argued that the nurse's time could be divided into a series of discrete tasks or functions, some of which did not need to be provided by a registered nurse, so that the NHS was only responsible for a proportion of the nurse's time spent working in the care home. The High Court upheld the local authorities' challenge. The health boards conceded that they had erred in excluding nurses' stand-by time from the calculations. Subject to that concession, the Court of Appeal allowed their appeal.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

Section 49 was aimed at the anomaly that nursing care was either provided free by the NHS or bought in by the local authority or residents depending on where it was provided. It was clearly intended to shift the boundary established by _[R. v North and East Devon HA Ex p. Coughlan [2001] Q.B. 213, [1999] 7 WLUK 371](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B8B1FC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b04aa8164822493dad67a8e18df0ab49&contextData=(sc.Default))_ in relation to the provision of nursing care further in the direction of NHS funding, Coughlan considered. However, the question remained as to whether "nursing care by a registered nurse" covered everything done by a registered nurse in a care home, as it would in a hospital or other health service setting. That turned on the meaning and purpose of the concluding words in s.49(2), "... other than any services which, having regard to their nature and the circumstances in which they are provided, do not need to be provided by a registered nurse." 

When passing the Act, Parliament had not intended to leave the division of responsibility to the NHS. It clearly intended to provide a test under s.49(2). If it had wanted to restrict the definition of "nursing care by a registered nurse" to tasks which could only be performed by a registered nurse, it would have said so. On the other hand, if it had wanted to prohibit local authorities from paying for anything done by a registered nurse in a care home, it also would have said so. Both parties' primary arguments were therefore rejected. The true meaning of the legislation had to be discerned. By definition, the court was looking at the funding of the care of residents who, although health care was not a primary need, needed some nursing care. That had to be provided by a registered nurse. Any other approach was contrary to the holistic view now taken of looking after the whole person. It was a matter of fact what part of the care provided would fall within that definition. The legislation clearly envisaged that there would be some circumstances in which care needed to be provided by a registered nurse, even though it was not care which only a registered nurse could provide. 

Therefore, "nursing care by a registered nurse" covered: 
(a) time spent on nursing care, in the sense of care which could only be provided by a registered nurse, including direct and indirect nursing time as defined by the study; 
(b) paid breaks; 
(c) time receiving supervision; 
(d) stand-by time; and 
(e) time spent on providing, planning, supervising or delegating the provision of other types of care, which in all the circumstances should be provided by a registered nurse because they were ancillary to, or closely connected with or part and parcel of, the nursing care which they had to provide. 

Concentration on the division between nursing and personal care had been a distraction. The only practical solution was to make a rough and ready calculation based on the generality of what took place. As held by the Court of Appeal, some differentiation between the care services provided was required, albeit with a different dividing line. Parliament had envisaged that some care services would be included beyond those which could only be provided by a registered nurse, hence the addition of category (e) to the above list. It followed that the boards' decisions were based on a misinterpretation of s.49(2). They would be quashed and retaken in the light of the guidance in the instant judgment (see paras [26, 35-46](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).