### Summary

There had been no breach of an expectation of public consultation before the Highways Agency had taken a decision to make a temporary traffic regulation order for the closure of a central reservation gap at a junction. But even if there had been, the breach was proportionate in the circumstances, given the agency's objective of seeking to remove the danger of fatal and serious accidents as soon as possible.

### Abstract

The claimant community action group (F) applied for judicial review of a decision by the defendant Highways Agency (the agency) to make a temporary traffic regulation order, under the [Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 s.14(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I617807A1E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ebf9cfe5f2cd4b738b034787db6ade2d&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The proposed order provided for the closure of a gap in the central reservation at a junction of a dual-carriageway road, to prevent turning movements. In 2001, the agency had proposed the permanent closure of the gap for safety reasons, and the proposal, having been the subject of a public consultation, resulted in numerous objections. The agency put forward alternative proposals and there was public consultation on those proposals in 2003. Draft orders were published in 2005. That led to numerous objections and the time taken to try to resolve those objections caused the statutory process to lapse. The agency formulated a modified scheme, combining the closure of the central reservation gap with the creation of new slip roads, for which a public exhibition was held in October 2006. It became clear that central government funding would not be available for the proposal. In a letter dated December 2006, the agency advised F that, in light of the number of objections and letters of support received, a public inquiry was required for the scheme, that future funding could not be guaranteed, and that it had therefore decided to proceed with a safety scheme involving closure of the central reservation alone. That closure was to be achieved under a temporary traffic regulation order which would be in force for 18 months, during which the effects would be monitored and views sought as to whether the closure should be made permanent. Objections were received. An agency representative attended public meetings and also meetings with councillors, county council officers, and the constituency's Member of Parliament to further discuss the proposals. Concerns expressed by F and others were addressed in a letter from the agency to F in January 2007. In light of the funding issues, in order to remove the danger of fatal and serious accidents, the agency decided to continue with its proposal. Formal notice of the proposed order was published in March 2007. However, F obtained interim injunctive relief preventing closure, pending the outcome of the proceedings.

F submitted that it had a legitimate expectation, based on the agency's past practice in respect of the junction, that there would be consultation before a decision was taken to make such a temporary order. That expectation was breached by the agency, in that there was no consultation prior to its decision to close the gap, which was effectively made in its letter of December 2006. Thereafter, there was no consultation, but merely a "briefing" of local interests about the reasons for the agency's decision. Further, F contended that even though the agency's objective, of avoiding more fatal or serious accidents, was legitimate, the means of achieving it were disproportionate.

### Held

Application refused.

(1) There was no express promise of consultation. At its highest, the agency's past practice in respect of the junction gave rise to an expectation of prior consultation. However, there had been no detrimental reliance; no promise was made to an individual or to a specific group. In practice, there was no breach of that expectation, but even if there had been, the breach was objectively justified as a proportionate measure in the circumstances, _[R. (on the application of Nadarajah) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, Times, December 14, 2005, [2005] 11 WLUK 580](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7E78C640E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ebf9cfe5f2cd4b738b034787db6ade2d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. (2) Following the agency's letter of December 2006, objectors had had ample opportunity, which they had taken, to make their views known prior to publication of the formal notice. The agency considered and responded to the objections made, both in correspondence and at meetings, but had not considered them to be so serious as to outweigh the safety advantages of closing the gap. It was difficult to see what could have been achieved by further consultation. (3) The proposal of the temporary order was not a disproportionate response. The circumstances were not of the agency's own making, but stemmed from the non-availability of central government funding. The agency's objective, of seeking to deliver a safety scheme as soon as possible, was plainly a legitimate aim pursued by a public body in the public interest. The proposed temporary order gave objectors an opportunity to see whether their fears would be realised in practice. If they were, then cogent evidence would be available for the agency to take into account in deciding whether to make a permanent order. If an application was made for such an order, there would be an opportunity to make written objections, the secretary of state would then have the discretion to hold an enquiry, and if that discretion was improperly exercised and an inquiry denied, then that decision could be the subject of judicial review.