
### Summary

A consultation process carried out by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on the future production of electricity in the United Kingdom in so far as it related to the use of new-build nuclear power plants for electricity production was procedurally unfair and a breach of a legitimate expectation that there would be the fullest consultation on that particular matter, so that the secretary of state's statement in support of nuclear new build as part of the UK's future electricity generating mix fell to declared invalid.

### Abstract

The claimant organisation (G) applied to quash a decision of the defendant secretary of state to support nuclear new build as part of the United Kingdom's future electricity generating mix.

The Government had published a White Paper on the future of energy production in the UK that addressed the possible use of new nuclear power plants to produce electricity. The White Paper indicated that the Government was not minded to support new nuclear build and that there was to be "the fullest public consultation" before the Government reached any decision to change its policy. Thereafter the secretary of state announced a review of the White Paper and issued a consultation document or paper for an energy review on the securing of long-term affordable energy in the UK including the use of electricity generated from nuclear power new build. Responses on energy policy were sought from all interested parties including members of the general public. A consultation period of 12 weeks was provided for. Having heard submissions from various parties including G, the secretary of state published an energy review report in which it was announced, among other things, that he had decided to support nuclear new build as part of the UK's future electricity generating mix. One of the issues was whether the decision was justiciable.

G contended that, given the Government's promise that there would be the fullest public consultation before it reached any decision to change its policy not to support nuclear new build, G and other members of the public had a legitimate expectation that there would be such consultation before a decision such as that challenged was implemented. Further, that expectation had been breached because the role of the consultation paper in the consultation process was that of an "Issues Paper" seeking consultees views on which issues should be addressed when deciding whether or not the nuclear new build option should be taken up and was not a consultation on the substantive issue, namely whether nuclear new build should be supported.

### Held

Declaration granted in favour of claimant.

(1) The decision was amenable to judicial review. The starting point to be taken was that where a public authority had issued a promise or adopted a practice that represented how it was supposed to act in a given area, the law would require the promise or practice to be honoured unless there was a good reason not to do so, _[R. (on the application of Nadarajah) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, Times, December 14, 2005, [2005] 11 WLUK 580](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7E78C640E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=78063daa71b2401e87bf996753c9572c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. While the decision could fairly be described as one that was dealing with a "high-level strategic issue", the promise was given at the highest level in a Government White Paper, and it would be curious if the law was not able to require the Government to honour such a promise absent any good reason for it to resile from it. There was no such reason in the instant case. Moreover, in the development of policy in the environmental field consultation was no longer a privilege to be granted or witheld by the executive. The Government was a signatory to the Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters 1998 (the Aarhus Convention) which required the Government to provide opportunities for public participation in the preparation of policies relating to the environment. Given the importance of the decision under challenge it was difficult to see how a promise of anything less than "the fullest public consultation" would have been consistent with the Government's obligations under the Aarhus Convention. Whilst it might be said that the decision was not strictly a statutory decision but was a step in the formulation of Government policy, the decision was the crucial stage in the formulation of Government policy on nuclear new build and amounted to a material consideration to which both local planning authorities and the secretary of state would have to have regard in any applications for planning permission for nuclear power plants and as such was open to judicial consideration, _[R. (on the application of Medway Council) v Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions [2002] EWHC 2516 (Admin), [2003] J.P.L. 583, [2002] 11 WLUK 735](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7A61DE70E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=78063daa71b2401e87bf996753c9572c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of Wandsworth LBC) v Secretary of State for Transport [2005] EWHC 20 (Admin), [2006] 1 E.G.L.R. 91, [2005] 2 WLUK 456](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7FA4EA30E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=78063daa71b2401e87bf996753c9572c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. 

(2) The consultation process was very seriously flawed, procedurally unfair and a breach of G's legitimate expectation that there would be the fullest consultation. The decision was therefore unlawful. The purpose of the consultation document was unclear. It gave the appearance of being an issues paper, namely a preliminary stage in the consultation process, which was to be followed by a consultation paper containing proposals on which consultees could make informed comment. As an issues paper the consultation document was satisfactory but as the consultation paper on an issue of such importance and complexity it was manifestly inadequate. It contained no proposals as such, and even if it had the information given to consultees, particularly regarding the critical issues of building costs and nuclear waste, was insufficient. There was effectively no discussion of the public considerations that would apply to nuclear new build. The period given for consultation was inadequate and it could not be said that following the consultation period the decision made by the secretary of state would have been reasonably foreseeable by those consultees who took the consultation document at face value and relied upon it, _[R. v North and East Devon HA Ex p. Coughlan [2001] Q.B. 213, [1999] 7 WLUK 371](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B8B1FC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=78063daa71b2401e87bf996753c9572c&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. (on the application of Edwards) v Environment Agency (No.2) [2006] EWCA Civ 877, [2007] Env. L.R. 9, [2006] 6 WLUK 621](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I46C3959007F011DB95BBEAD76D4DB061/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=78063daa71b2401e87bf996753c9572c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Wandsworth considered.