The Court of Appeal upheld the parking adjudicator's decision that minor irregularities in road signs and road markings in the Sunderland Controlled Parking Zone did not invalidate the 39 penalty notice charges accumulated in that zone by the claimant.

---

### Summary

It was not a requirement of the [Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 2002 reg.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I42622370E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default)) that every part of every street had to be signed in the manner specified. A controlled parking zone was to be treated as valid unless it could be said that in substance, because of the failure adequately to inform the road user, it could not be considered to be a valid controlled parking zone.

### Abstract

The appellants appealed against a decision (_[[2010] EWHC 1161 (Admin), [2011] R.T.R. 10](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB3D6AB20686511DFB2B6B7A7CEFEEDEC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default))_) to dismiss their claim for judicial review of a decision of a parking adjudicator who rejected their application for a review of a decision of another parking adjudicator (K).

A number of penalty charge notices had been issued against the appellants in relation to alleged parking contraventions committed by them within a controlled parking zone (CPZ), which was operated by the first interested party local authority. The appellants complained of irregularities in signage within the CPZ and maintained that it was not a valid and lawful CPZ, namely that there were signs that did not comply with statutory specification or that the requisite signs were lacking. K upheld 39 of the penalty charge notices. He held that any irregularity did not of itself invalidate the CPZ. He also found that the irregularities established by the appellants were trivialities that could not mislead a driver. In the judicial review proceedings, the judge held that the irregularities relied on were immaterial if they were too far from the site of the contravention to lead the motorist into error. The issue in the appeal concerned the definition of a CPZ in the [Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 2002 reg.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I42622370E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The appellants submitted that reg.4 had to be strictly construed and on such a construction it required that every part of every street had to be marked with the signs, including single yellow lines, referred to in that regulation. The appellants argued that any departure (other than one which was trivial) from the definition of a CPZ in reg.4 invalidated the CPZ.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) It was not a requirement of reg.4 that every part of every street had to be signed in the manner specified. The fact that there were road signs regulating parking that were not referred to in reg.4 rendered it impossible to read it as requiring the specified signage in every part of every road. The definition of CPZ was not to be so strictly construed as to read in words that were not there (see para.[29](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). Even where a statute was clear in imposing a duty, and did so in terms that were apparently mandatory, it would not necessarily be interpreted as invalidating steps taken by a public authority that were not in strict conformity with the duty, _[R. v Soneji (Kamlesh Kumar) [2005] UKHL 49, [2006] 1 A.C. 340, [2005] 7 WLUK 669](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6A674AF0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Applying that principle, the submission that any departure, other than one which was trivial, from the definition of a CPZ in reg.4 invalidated the CPZ had to be rejected (paras [32-33](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) The parking restrictions in question were imposed by the applicable traffic regulation order (TRO) and were not dependent on the existence or validity of the CPZ (para.[34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The enforceability of a TRO required that adequate notice of the applicable restriction was given to the road user. That principle was derived from the duty imposed by [Local Authorities' Traffic Orders (Procedure) (England and Wales) Regulations 1996 reg.18](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I622D9C00E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default)). Applying that principle, the question for K was whether the local authority had taken steps to secure that adequate information was conveyed to the appellants as to the parking restrictions which they had infringed, _[Macleod v Hamilton (Mary Elizabeth) 1965 S.L.T. 305, [1965] 6 WLUK 91](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEC913E10E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[James v Cavey [1967] 2 Q.B. 676, [1967] 2 WLUK 53](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICBD23760E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The definition in reg.4, and whether the roads in the CPZ had been signed as it envisaged were relevant to that question. Provided in substance the requirements of the definition were satisfied, the CPZ was valid. The test for invalidity was not whether the irregularities were trivial, but whether there had been substantial compliance with the statutory definition (paras [35-37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Ouseley J in _[R. (on the application of Moss) v KPMG LLP [2010] EWHC 2923 (Admin), [2010] 10 WLUK 275](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I48F27E30D80211DFA2DAD2D19DEBE57F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ had been wrong to follow the strict approach in _[Davies v Heatley [1971] R.T.R. 145, [1971] 2 WLUK 22](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I592D0320E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0a422fea27644982844c8f1cac12cbe2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that dealt with the failure to comply with traffic signs, Moss disapproved and Davies considered. Even applying the test put forward by the appellants, the irregularities were de minimis and did not affect the validity of the CPZ (paras [35-37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) The judge had been correct in holding that the irregularities relied on were immaterial if they were too far from the site of the contravention to lead the motorist into error (para.[48](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).