### Summary

The court determined that it was not bound to follow _[Ostendorf v Germany (15598/08) 34 B.H.R.C. 738, [2013] 3 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4A94E5502A2711E3B5D7DC8FBE45C841/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default))_, and that the arrest and detention of a group of people in order to prevent a breach of the peace had been lawful for the purposes of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.5(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default)). It also derived principles from domestic case law as to how English courts should deal with Strasbourg decisions on the interpretation of the ambit of a provision of the Convention.

### Abstract

The appellants (H) appealed against a decision (_[[2012] EWHC 1947 (Admin), [2012] A.C.D. 102](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFCC45300D12711E185D385914EB5867B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that their arrest and detention in order to prevent a breach of the peace was lawful under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.5(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default)).

H was a group of 15 claimants, divided into four groups to reflect the fact that they had been arrested in separate incidents. The instant appeal focused, as test cases, on four appellants, each representing one of the groups. H had been arrested at various locations in London on the day of a royal wedding, and were detained until the wedding finished. It was common ground that the police had acted lawfully to the extent that they exercised preventative powers recognised in domestic law, and that the decisions to arrest, detain and later release without recourse to the magistrates' court were, in the circumstances, lawful at common law. The Divisional Court, in considering H's argument under art.5(1)(c), concluded that arrest or detention "for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence" was distinct from detention "reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence" on the basis that the latter was not qualified by the words "for the purpose of bringing him before a competent legal authority".

H submitted that, following the European Court of Human Rights in _[Ostendorf v Germany (15598/08) 34 B.H.R.C. 738, [2013] 3 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4A94E5502A2711E3B5D7DC8FBE45C841/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default))_, the court should conclude that the Divisional Court was wrong to find their arrests and detentions to be lawful under art.5(1)(c).

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) In Ostendorf it was concluded that the requirement that an arrest or detention to prevent the commission of an offence had to be effected for the purpose of bringing a person before the competent legal authority, qualified each category of detention referred to in art.5(1)(c). Accordingly, deprivation of liberty would be permitted under that section only in connection with criminal proceedings: it governed pre-trial detention. However, that proposition was manifestly inconsistent with the decision in _[Lawless v Ireland (No.3) (A/3) (1979-80) 1 E.H.R.R. 15, [1961] 7 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7BC72C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default))_, and also rested uneasily with the decisions in _[Brogan v United Kingdom (A/145-B) (1989) 11 E.H.R.R. 117, [1988] 11 WLUK 363](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7BCC3950E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Steel v United Kingdom (24838/94) (1999) 28 E.H.R.R. 603, [1998] 9 WLUK 214](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBE8CBC50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default))_. Ostendorf appeared to have been decided on a limited and selective consideration of previous ECtHR decisions. If followed, it would effectively excise lawful arrest and detention when "it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent [a detainee] committing an offence" from art.5(1)(c). There was no authority for the proposition that its scope was limited to a refusal of post-charge bail on the ground of likelihood of committing further offences whilst on bail. The instant court would not follow Ostendorf on that point unless it was compelled to do so (see paras [35-38](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The court was bound by the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B24CE80E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9927c3f16bde46febefed1811951d777&contextData=(sc.Default)) to take into account all relevant ECtHR decisions. However, the decisions relevant to the instant case did not create a clear and consistent line of authority on the ambit of the disputed element of art.5(1)(c). The following principles could be derived from domestic case law as to how English courts should deal with Strasbourg decisions on the interpretation of the ambit of a provision of the Convention, as opposed to an ECtHR decision on how a provision in the Convention was to apply to particular factual circumstances. It followed that: 

(a) it was the duty of the national court to enforce domestically enacted Convention rights; 
(b) the ECtHR was the court that ultimately had to interpret the meaning of the Convention; 
(c) the UK courts were bound to follow an interpretation if given by the Grand Chamber as authoritative, unless it was apparent that it had misunderstood or overlooked some significant feature of English law or practice which, properly explained, would lead to that interpretation being reviewed by the ECtHR when its interpretation was being applied to English circumstances; 
(d) the same principle and qualification applied to a "clear and constant" line of ECtHR decisions other than one of the Grand Chamber; 
(e) Convention rights had to be given effect in the light of the domestic law which implemented in detail the "high level" rights set out in the Convention; (f) where there were "mixed messages" in the existing Strasbourg case law, a "real judicial choice" would have to be made about the scope and application of the relevant Convention provision. Ostendorf was neither a decision of the Grand Chamber, nor was it indicative of "clear and constant" Strasbourg jurisprudence, save that the arrest or detention must, in all three categories, be "effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority". Accordingly, the instant court was not bound to follow it (paras [69-81](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) There was no doubt that the police had had reasonable grounds for suspecting that a breach of the peace was imminent. H's arrests and detentions were therefore "reasonably considered necessary to prevent [the appellants from] committing an offence". The critical question was therefore whether the deprivations of liberty were "effected for the purpose of bring [those arrested] before the competent legal authority", namely the magistrates' court. Events did not deteriorate to the point where it was necessary to detain H for longer, and therefore require them to be brought before the magistrates court. However, it could be safely concluded that they were arrested and detained "for the purpose of bringing [them] before the competent legal authority", if that were to become necessary, so as to prolong detention on a lawful basis (paras [82-88](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).