### Summary

The Supreme Court declined to follow the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in _[James v United Kingdom (25119/09) (2013) 56 E.H.R.R. 12, [2012] 9 WLUK 278](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB47A11503D2111E2BB7CC6D41D9471E8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_. It was implicit in the scheme of [ECHR art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default)) that the state had a duty to provide a reasonable opportunity for a prisoner subject to an indeterminate sentence to rehabilitate himself and demonstrate that he no longer presented a danger to the public. However, that was an ancillary duty which could not be brought within the express language of either art.5(1)(a) or art.5(4) and did not therefore affect the lawfulness of detention.

### Abstract

The appellant prisoners (K, H, R and M) appealed against decisions (_[[2013] EWCA Civ 1587, [2014] 1 W.L.R. 1208](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I476F6410612A11E3908FDBBE4A458ACD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[[2013] EWHC 3777 (Admin)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB338F2E05D4411E3AC48EBD012647ADF/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that their continued detention following the expiry of their minimum terms was lawful.

K, H, R and M were serving indeterminate prison sentences comprising a fixed minimum term and an indeterminate post-tariff period which had to continue until the Parole Board decided that their confinement was no longer necessary for the protection of the public. Each claimed that their progress towards post-tariff release had been hampered by failures of the prison service concerning their rehabilitation. H complained that his rights under [ECHR art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default)) had been breached because he had been transferred to open prison conditions too close to the expiry of his minimum term to allow his immediate release. He also claimed that he had been discriminated against under art.14 by the prison authorities' decision to prioritise the movement to open conditions of those whose tariff periods had already expired. R, M and K all complained that they had been unable to commence extended sex offender treatment programmes until after expiry of their tariffs. The Divisional Court and Court of Appeal dismissed all of the claims in light of the decision in _[R. (on the application of Wells) v Parole Board for England and Wales [2009] UKHL 22, [2010] 1 A.C. 553, [2009] 5 WLUK 76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I75D38CA03ABA11DE9952F6F64616CDFA/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_. The issue was whether the contrary decision of the European Court of Human Rights in _[James v United Kingdom (25119/09) (2013) 56 E.H.R.R. 12, [2012] 9 WLUK 278](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB47A11503D2111E2BB7CC6D41D9471E8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_ could be relied upon to challenge the legitimacy of the continued detention of a prisoner serving an indeterminate sentence after the expiry of his tariff, before the Parole Board had expressed satisfaction about his safety for release in accordance with the [Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.28(6)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6652EDA0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Held

Appeals allowed in part.

(1) There was a real difficulty about accepting that ECHR rights required the release of an indeterminate prisoner before the Parole Board was satisfied that his detention was no longer required for the protection of the public. That would mean that s.28(6)(b) of the 1997 Act conflicted with ECHR rights. It would also involve releasing someone whose safety for release had not been established. It was not possible to follow the reasoning of the ECtHR in James v UK. Arbitrariness had a confined meaning when used as a test of lawfulness in the context of art.5(1)(a), _[Saadi v United Kingdom (13229/03) (2007) 44 E.H.R.R. 50, [2006] 7 WLUK 285](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAC5AE8F032B511DB8591EC6659BE7CBE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. It was implicit in the scheme of art.5 that the state had a duty to provide a reasonable opportunity to a prisoner to rehabilitate himself and demonstrate that he no longer presented an unacceptable danger to the public. However, that duty could not be brought within the express language of either art.5(1)(a) or art.5(4). A duty to facilitate release could be implied as part of the overall scheme of art.5 as an ancillary duty not affecting the lawfulness of the detention. The appropriate remedy for breach of such duty was not release, but an award of damages for legitimate frustration and anxiety, James v UK not applied, Wells applied (see paras [30, 32, 34-36, 38, 40](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The secretary of state had indicated that H should be provided with an opportunity to demonstrate that he was no longer a danger, namely a transfer to open conditions. However, systemic failures meant that he had been deprived of that opportunity until just before expiry of the tariff period. There had been a breach of the ancillary obligation in art.5, sufficient to justify the inference of legitimate frustration. An appropriate award was £500, _[R. (on the application of Sturnham) v Parole Board for England and Wales [2013] UKSC 23, [2013] 2 A.C. 254, [2013] 5 WLUK 36](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6CA7F2D0B25011E28AF4B758760EF7EB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4e2ba678cde74c4b8c8e3f1791fab4ac&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. H's art.14 complaint had to be rejected because the secretary of state's policy of prioritising transfer of prisoners whose tariff periods had already expired was a proportionate and realistic reaction to the backlog of transfers which faced the prison system (paras [49-50, 53-54](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) During the three years of K's minimum term, he had been provided with a fair and reasonable opportunity to rehabilitate himself through various courses, but his response had been poor. In his case, there had been no breach of the ancillary obligation under art.5 (para.[60](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) Following expiry of M's tariff, the secretary of state had provided for a two-year timetable for him to build on his partial progress and demonstrate that he was safe to release. That timetable had not been honoured and there had been an unacceptable delay of a year in him being able to begin an extended sex offender treatment programme. He had not been given the opportunity to demonstrate that he was safe for release. The inference of legitimate frustration was justified and damages of £600 were appropriate (para.[69](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(5) (Lord Mance dissenting) A delay of nearly nine months in R being offered an extended sexual offender's treatment programme after expiry of his tariff did not breach his art.5 rights. Other work had been undertaken which had provided him with ample opportunity to demonstrate that he had changed. However, that work had simply served to demonstrate the risk that he continued to present. There was no legal obligation to provide an extended sex offender treatment programme. It was not the only way in which R had been able to demonstrate his safety. A delay in providing it did not constitute a breach of the ancillary duty under art.5 (paras [89-92](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).