In this case several people had been arrested and detained for periods of between 2½ – 5½ hours in order to prevent them causing a breach of the peace by disrupting the wedding of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge.

The Supreme Court held that the police could rely on the second limb of article 5(1)(c). This limb should be interpreted as permitting proportionate detention for preventative purposes followed by early release. The words ‘for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority’ in article 5(1)(c) should be read as being implicitly dependent on the cause for detention continuing long enough for the person to be brought before the court.

---

### Summary

The arrest and detention of four people at a public event in order to prevent a breach of the peace had been lawful for the purposes of [ECHR art.5(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5c210d7a8bd481ea45787b975839635&contextData=(sc.Default)). The court declined to apply the decision in _[Ostendorf v Germany (15598/08) 34 B.H.R.C. 738, [2013] 3 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4A94E5502A2711E3B5D7DC8FBE45C841/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5c210d7a8bd481ea45787b975839635&contextData=(sc.Default))_. The derogation in art.5(1)(c) was capable of applying to detention for preventative purposes, with early release before the person could practicably be brought before a court.

### Abstract

The appellants appealed against a decision that their arrest and detention had been lawful for the purposes of [ECHR art.5(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5c210d7a8bd481ea45787b975839635&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The appellants were part of a larger group of claimants, and their claims had been chosen as a test case. They were arrested in central London on the day of a royal wedding, in order to prevent a breach of the peace. They were detained until the wedding finished, and released without charge. It was agreed that the police had acted lawfully at common law in exercising preventative powers of arrest and detention. The issue was whether the appellants' arrest was a breach of art.5(1)(c) which allowed “the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it was reasonably considered necessary to prevent him committing an offence”. The Divisional Court concluded that the words “for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority” did not apply where the purpose of the arrest was to prevent commission of an offence, but the arrests were lawful on other grounds. The Court of Appeal agreed that the arrests were lawful, but for different reasons, stating that the appellants were arrested and detained to bring them before a competent legal authority so as to lawfully prolong their detention.

The appellants argued that the Court of Appeal should have followed the interpretation of art.5(1)(c) set out in _[Ostendorf v Germany (15598/08) 34 B.H.R.C. 738, [2013] 3 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4A94E5502A2711E3B5D7DC8FBE45C841/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5c210d7a8bd481ea45787b975839635&contextData=(sc.Default))_, where it was decided by majority that art.5(1)(c) only covered pre-trial detention rather than custody for preventative purposes.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) The Strasbourg case law on the issue was not clear and settled, as was evident from the division of opinions in Ostendorf. In Ostendorf, the minority view was that art.5(1)(c) was capable of applying in a case of detention for preventative purposes followed by early release, namely before the person could practicably be brought before a court. That view was correct. The fundamental principle underlying art.5 was the need to protect the individual from arbitrary detention, and an essential part of that protection was timely judicial control, but art.5 should not be interpreted in such a way as would make it impracticable for the police to perform their duty to maintain public order and protect the lives and property of others. In balancing those twin considerations, it was necessary to keep a grasp of reality and the practical implications (see paras [30-33](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) There was nothing arbitrary about the decisions to arrest, detain and release the appellants. They were taken in good faith and were proportionate. If the police could not lawfully arrest and detain a person for a relatively short time (too short for it to be practical to take the person before a court) where it was reasonably considered to be necessary for the purpose of preventing imminent violence, that would severely hamper their ability to maintain public order and safety at mass public events. It would also run counter to the fundamental principles underlying art.5 (para.[31](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) It would be perverse if, in order to be able to lawfully detain a person to prevent their commission of an offence, the police had to intend to continue detention after the risk had passed until the person could be brought before a court for them to be bound over to keep the peace. That would lengthen the period of detention and place an unnecessary burden on court time and police resources. The qualification on the power of arrest or detention under art.5(1)(c), contained in the words “for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority”, should therefore be read as implicitly dependent on the cause for detention continuing long enough for the person to be brought before the court. In the case of an early release from detention for preventive purposes, it was enough for guaranteeing the rights inherent in art.5 if the lawfulness of the detention could be subsequently be challenged and decided by a court, Ostendorf not applied, _[Lawless v Ireland (No.3) (A/3) (1979-80) 1 E.H.R.R. 15, [1961] 7 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7BC72C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5c210d7a8bd481ea45787b975839635&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [36-38](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) The police had also relied on [art.5(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d5c210d7a8bd481ea45787b975839635&contextData=(sc.Default)), namely the lawful arrest or detention of a person for non-compliance with a lawful order. However, a general obligation not to commit a criminal offence, such as a breach of the peace, was not specific enough to fall under art.5(1)(b). That obligation did not acquire the necessary degree of specificity by reminding the person of it. Article 5(1)(b) was not applicable to the instant case.