### Summary

The vice-president of the Institute of Legal Executives, due to her leading role in the body and thereby her interest in its policy of disciplinary regulation, was disqualified from sitting on its disciplinary or appeal tribunal. It was possible to see the doctrine of automatic disqualification and the doctrine of apparent bias as two strands of a single over-arching requirement that judges should not sit or should face recusal or disqualification where there was a real possibility, assessed by the fair-minded and informed observer, that the tribunal objectively appeared to be or could be biased.

### Abstract

The appellant (K) appealed against a decision (_[[2010] EWHC 3321 (Admin), [2011] A.C.D. 25](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2C6A1490F77811DF93AD9DFF45835C7C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fef9d0b1c1294bf08c2bee586c71b4d2&contextData=(sc.Default))_) refusing to grant her judicial review application concerning allegations of apparent bias by the respondent Institute of Legal Executives (ILEX) and its appeal tribunal.

ILEX was a professional body whose articles of association stated that it existed to promote and secure professional standards of conduct amongst its members. It was governed by ILEX council members who were also ILEX directors. K, a student member of ILEX, had been charged with disciplinary offences concerning allegations that she had cheated in her examinations. A disciplinary tribunal, comprising two lay members and an ILEX council member, found the case against her proved in respect of one examination. That decision was upheld by the appeal tribunal, which, in accordance with ILEX rules, consisted of two lay members and the council's vice-president. ILEX later changed its disciplinary hearings so that council members no longer served on the tribunals.

K submitted that, whether under the doctrine of automatic disqualification, namely that no one should be a judge in his own cause, or under the doctrine of apparent bias, council members and so directors and the vice-president of ILEX were disqualified from sitting on the disciplinary tribunal or the appeal tribunal which had heard her case.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) Participation in a prosecutorial capacity would disqualify or raise concern in the mind of the fair-minded observer about the appearance of impartial justice. Even an employee of a prosecuting agency who was not employed in a prosecutorial capacity might fall within that disqualification or raise concern, provided the employment was significant enough in length, importance or location. However, that did not apply to every employee. Mere membership of a prosecuting association would not disqualify where there was no involvement in the case concerned, but a more senior role in governance might do so, even though there had been no specific involvement in the case, where the person in that role was not excluded from concern for regulation in general, _[P (A Barrister) v General Council of the Bar [2005] 1 W.L.R. 3019, [2005] 1 WLUK 364](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I15D58331E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fef9d0b1c1294bf08c2bee586c71b4d2&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Meerabux v Attorney General of Belize [2005] UKPC 12, [2005] 2 A.C. 513, [2005] 3 WLUK 770](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF8A91920E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fef9d0b1c1294bf08c2bee586c71b4d2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v L [2011] EWCA Crim 65, [2011] 1 Cr. App. R. 27, [2011] 1 WLUK 182](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB529D19045EC11E091148B56C84DA497/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fef9d0b1c1294bf08c2bee586c71b4d2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (see para.[35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) It was possible to see the doctrine of automatic disqualification and the doctrine of apparent bias as two strands of a single over-arching requirement that judges should not sit or should face recusal or disqualification where there was a real possibility on the objective appearance of things, assessed by the fair-minded and informed observer, that the tribunal could be biased, _[R. v Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate Ex p. Pinochet Ugarte (No.2) [2000] 1 A.C. 119, [1999] 1 WLUK 487](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3429A460E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fef9d0b1c1294bf08c2bee586c71b4d2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, [2002] 2 A.C. 357, [2001] 12 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I23D2C010E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fef9d0b1c1294bf08c2bee586c71b4d2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The two doctrines might be analytically reconciled by regarding the automatic disqualification test as dealing with cases where the personal interest of the judge concerned was deemed to raise a case of apparent bias, if judged sufficient on the basis of appearances to raise the real possibility of preventing him bringing an objective judgment to bear. In the instant case, it was not necessary to choose between the two doctrines. Applying either test, the vice-president of ILEX was disqualified by her leading role in ILEX, and so her inevitable interest in ILEX's policy of disciplinary regulation, from sitting on a disciplinary or appeal tribunal. The same conclusion would embrace all such council members and directors (paras [45-47](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) Whatever the means by which the regulations and representation were kept separate, the necessary insulation was overleaped if those principally concerned in governance were permitted to move from representative to regulatory functions as ex officio members of disciplinary or appeal tribunals (para.[49](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

## Appellate History