The Secretary of State cancelled funding for the project 'Building Schools for the Future’.

The court found that, while the minister was entitled to adopt rules, each individual project should have been considered on its own merits, after careful consultation with each of the claimants. Instead, rules had been applied in a rigid way and the minister was asked by the court to reconsider the position of each of the claimants with an 'open mind'.

---

### Summary

The secretary of state's decision to stop certain school building projects which had received outline business case approval under the Building Schools for the Future programme was unlawful as he had failed to consult the local authorities affected and he had failed to discharge his statutory duties under equality legislation.

### Abstract

The claimant local authorities applied for judicial review of a decision of the defendant secretary of state to stop certain school building projects which had been earmarked under the Building Schools for the Future (BSF) programme.

That programme aimed over a 15-year period from 2005 to rebuild or refurbish every secondary school in England. After the change of government in May 2010 the secretary of state decided on July 5, 2010 to end it. The claimants contended that his decision was unlawful, at least in so far as it affected them, and that he should be required to reconsider the affected projects in their areas. The projects affected were principally those which had received "outline business case" approval after January 1, 2010, but which had not received "final business case" approval (from which a promise of funding flowed) by July 5, 2010.

The claimants argued that (1) the secretary of state's selection of January 1, 2010 as the cut-off date for projects was arbitrary and irrational and bore no relation to any date in the BSF programme or process; (2) by adopting the rules-based approach that he did, the secretary of state had unlawfully fettered his discretion; (3) the decision-making process had breached their substantive legitimate expectations; (4) the decision-making process had breached their legitimate procedural expectation that they would be consulted; (5) the secretary of state had failed to discharge statutory duties under the equality legislation.

### Held

Application granted in part.

(1) The decision was not open to legal challenge on a discrete ground of irrationality, _[R. (on the application of Cordant Group Plc) v Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills [2010] EWHC 3442 (Admin), (2011) 108(4) L.S.G. 19, [2010] 12 WLUK 824](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5AD9D120192A11E0AF46BD1FAE2CC9FF/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4d827ae72ee4544bcf3c7e47935304f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. It was a decision with a patently political and heavy macro-economic content. If the secretary of state had acted irrationally or unlawfully when making that type of decision, that should be apparent without unduly detailed or sophisticated enquiry, _[Jones v Jones [2011] EWCA Civ 41, [2012] Fam. 1, [2011] 1 WLUK 552](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I58203F702B3E11E085C4A124F157ADA5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4d827ae72ee4544bcf3c7e47935304f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The secretary of state and his officials did not misunderstand what they were doing. He drew a clear demarcation between situations where the local authorities already had contractual obligations and where they did not. The cut-off date of January 1, 2010 bore no relation to the BSF programme, but it clearly fitted and reflected government-wide policy, and helped to achieve it by making large savings. The secretary of state's reasons for his decision might or might not withstand political scrutiny, but there was no inherent irrationality about them (see paras [8, 47-48](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (2) Even if the secretary of state was making a one-off decision, he did so in circumstances in which the essential duty not to fetter discretion so as to preclude individual consideration of individual cases was in play. There were many projects from many different local authorities, all at more or less advanced stages of the pipeline. Each project was an individual case. The secretary of state decided certain rules, but his officials then applied those rules to each project so as to decide into which category it fell. It was the application of a policy decision or "rules" which determined, without more, the outcome in all the claimants' categories of projects. The rules were applied in a hard-edged way, with no individual discretion (paras [60-61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (3) The outline business case approvals did not create a substantive legitimate expectation that any given project would definitely proceed. Further, the law recognised that public bodies, and especially central government, enjoyed a wide discretion to change policies from time to time to reflect their conception of the public interest. That was especially so in the case of a different political party taking power after a general election. All participating local authorities must have known that there would be a general election, and none of them with anything less than full business case approval could have had any legitimate expectation that any project would still go ahead after it, _[R. (on the application of Bibi) v Newham LBC (No.1) [2001] EWCA Civ 607, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 237, [2001] 4 WLUK 438](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I789052C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4d827ae72ee4544bcf3c7e47935304f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [78-82](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (4) The BSF process had involved continuous and intense dialogue between the education department and the local authorities, who right up to the date of the decision were acting and spending in reliance on their outline business case approvals. The way in which the secretary of state abruptly stopped those projects, without any prior consultation with the claimants, was so unfair as to amount to an abuse of power. There was no overriding public interest that precluded any consultation or justified the lack of consultation. The very substantial sums of money involved reinforced the need to consult. Therefore, insofar as it affected the claimants the decision was unlawful, _[R. v Secretary of State for Education and Science Ex p. Southwark LBC [1995] E.L.R. 308, [1994] 1 WLUK 527](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I90A880E0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4d827ae72ee4544bcf3c7e47935304f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[R. (on the application of Niazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 755, Times, July 21, 2008, [2008] 7 WLUK 256](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA1D13D104E4411DD9EB58092CC935BBC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4d827ae72ee4544bcf3c7e47935304f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [83-97](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (5) Neither the papers prepared for ministers in the period May to July 2010 nor the decision itself contained any reference to disability, race or gender need or impact. It seemed that no regard was had to the relevant duties at all, let alone rigorous regard, _[R. (on the application of Brown) v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2008] EWHC 3158 (Admin), [2009] P.T.S.R. 1506, [2008] 12 WLUK 546](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7DAC3940E44811DD843DEF0BC00E461F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4d827ae72ee4544bcf3c7e47935304f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. This too made the decision-making process unlawful (paras [101-116](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).