### Summary

A quashing of a planning permission relating to mixed residential and leisure development was not justified as it was not demonstrated that members of a planning committee made the planning decision with closed minds to planning merits or that there was a real possibility of closed mind or predetermination.

### Abstract

The appellant (P) appealed against a decision (_[[2007] EWHC 3166 (Admin), [2008] A.C.D. 38](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D46C4E0C58B11DC86AB862C2CFC5E08/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_) quashing the grant by a local authority of planning permission for a mixed residential and leisure development on land owned by the local authority.

The site was near a Special Protection Area, which was also a European site for the purposes of the Conservation (Natural Habitats) Regulations 1994 reg.48. The local authority had appointed P as the development partner. By then the control of the local authority had passed from Labour to a coalition, which comprised representatives from other political parties. Heads of terms were signed by the local authority's cabinet and P in relation to the development. Subsequently, an application for planning permission was made. The local authority issued guidance suggesting that decisions on controversial matters should be avoided during the upcoming election period. However, the application was considered during that period, and it was resolved at a planning committee meeting, at which a member of the cabinet (K) and all other coalition members voted in favour of the development, that the development be approved. Following the election there was a change of political control. The respondent (L) claimed that there had been an appearance of bias or predetermination on the part of the coalition members. The judge held that there were unusual circumstances that required the permission to be quashed.

L submitted that the local Labour party was opposed to the development and a politically controversial decision should not have been taken in the pre-election period. L argued that, in the absence of a good reason for holding the planning meeting during the pre-election period, the notional independent observer would find that there was a real possibility that minds were closed to planning merits. L also contended that the judge had been wrong to find that there was no breach of reg.48.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) Analysis of the evidence did not support the party political dichotomy alleged. Evidence suggested that the Labour party supported the development. There was little evidence that the committee members were any more politically motivated than would normally be expected from elected policy makers. The failure to follow the local authority advice would not, of itself, invalidate the planning permission. It was for the court to assess, putting itself in the shoes of the fair-minded observer, whether the committee members made the decision with closed minds or that the circumstances gave rise to a real risk of closed minds or predetermination. Appearances, in that context, could not be excluded altogether. The appearance created by a member of a judicial tribunal also appearing as an advocate before the tribunal might make his judicial decisions unacceptable but the appearance created by a planning committee member should be viewed in a different way, _[R. v Amber Valley DC Ex p. Jackson [1985] 1 W.L.R. 298, [1983] 3 WLUK 97](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2F2F6170E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Franklin v Minister of Town and Country Planning [1948] A.C. 87, [1947] 7 WLUK 74](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA914A190E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. (on the application of Holding & Barnes Plc) v Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport and the Regions [2001] UKHL 23, [2003] 2 A.C. 295, [2001] 5 WLUK 241](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79A6F2E0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[CREEDNZ Inc v Governor General [1981] 1 N.Z.L.R. 172, [1981] 7 WLUK 287](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I255461A02DAA11EC8C6596C67312BE77/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. (on the application of Cummins) v Camden LBC [2001] EWHC Admin 1116, [2001] 12 WLUK 720](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I78F13770E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, [2002] 2 A.C. 357, [2001] 12 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I23D2C010E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Georgiou v Enfield LBC [2004] EWHC 779 (Admin), [2004] B.L.G.R. 497, [2004] 4 WLUK 225](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE489220E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791fb03ac6b34bf0b3cef4b2cb5b8ba3&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. There was no question of personal interest on the part of K or other committee members. The committee consisted of elected members who were entitled, and indeed expected, to have, and to have expressed, views on planning issues, Amber applied. When taking a decision, the members had to have regard to material considerations, but they were not required to cast aside views on planning policy they would have formed when seeking election. What was objectionable was predetermination. The decision maker should be open to new arguments up to the moment of decision. The test was a very different one from that to be applied to those in a judicial or quasi-judicial position. A decision maker in the planning context was not acting in a judicial or quasi-judicial role but in a situation of democratic accountability. He had to address the planning issues before him fairly and on their merits, even though he might approach them with a predisposition in favour of one side of the argument. The danger of the "notional observer" test was that the role of elected members of the committee might not fully be taken into account. In the instant case, the committee members had experience in respect of the development and received advice as to the timing of the meeting. The imminence of the local elections at the time of decision did not demonstrate that those who voted in favour of the planning application had minds closed to the planning merits. There was no apparent risk of predetermination. There was no basis on which the absence of dissent by coalition members could amount to "unusual circumstances" that could contribute to a decision to quash. The notion that a planning decision was suspect because all members of a single political group had voted for it was an unwarranted interference with the democratic process. The decision to quash the planning permission was unjustified. 

(2) As regards the reg.48 issue, the committee had expert advice and could assume from the source of the advice that the appropriate test had been applied.