#key-case 

### Summary

The lawfulness of advice given by the Prime Minister to the Queen to prorogue Parliament was justiciable in the courts. Advice the Prime Minister had given to prorogue for five weeks in the period leading up to the scheduled date for the UK's withdrawal from the EU was unlawful because it had the effect of frustrating or preventing the constitutional role of Parliament in holding the Government to account, and no reasonable justification had been given for that. Accordingly, Parliament had not been prorogued.

### Abstract

On appeals from the Divisional Court in England and Wales and from the Inner House of the Court of Session in Scotland, the Supreme Court was required to determine the lawfulness of the Prime Minister's advice to the Queen to prorogue Parliament from a date between 9 and 12 September 2019 until 14 October 2019.

In accordance with the advice, the Queen had issued an Order in Council requiring prorogation, which would end the current parliamentary session. Documents disclosed by the Government indicated that it wished to prepare a Queen's speech setting out new legislative proposals, to be given at the start of the new session on 14 October. The UK was scheduled to withdraw from the EU on 31 October. In contrast to the position during a parliamentary recess, prorogation immediately suspended parliamentary business, including matters surrounding withdrawal. Business would not recommence until the start of the new session. Parliament was purportedly prorogued in accordance with the Order in Council. The Divisional Court held that the advice was not justiciable. The Inner House held that it was unlawful.

### Held

Appeal in Miller allowed, appeal in Cherry dismissed.

**Approach to justiciability -** In advising prorogation, the Prime Minister had a constitutional responsibility to have regard to all relevant interests, including those of Parliament. Although the courts could not decide political questions, they had exercised a supervisory jurisdiction over executive decisions for centuries. Although the Prime Minister was accountable to Parliament, that did not mean that the courts had no legitimate role: prorogation prevented ministerial accountability to Parliament during prorogation, and the courts had a duty to give effect to the law irrespective of the minister's accountability to Parliament, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Fire Brigades Union [1995] 2 A.C. 513, [1995] 4 WLUK 54](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I657B5FE0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. If the issue was justiciable, deciding it would not offend the separation of powers: the court would perform its constitutional function (see paras [30-34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). The question of whether a prerogative power existed, and of the power's extent, was justiciable, _[Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] A.C. 374, [1984] 11 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8F0974B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The question of whether a prerogative power, exercised within its limits, was open to legal challenge raised questions of whether the exercise was challengeable on the basis of the recognised grounds of judicial review. That depended on the nature and subject-matter of the particular power (para.[35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Standard of lawfulness -** Since prerogative powers were recognised by common law, common law principles, including constitutional principles, could illuminate where a power's boundaries lay. The fundamental principle of parliamentary sovereignty was not confined to recognising the status of legislation enacted by Parliament: prerogative powers were limited by parliamentary sovereignty, _[Case of Proclamations 77 E.R. 1352, [1610] 1 WLUK 362](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9A0DA170BA8A11DC8D6887EE04E6D194/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[De Keyser's Royal Hotel Ltd, Re [1920] A.C. 508, [1920] 5 WLUK 46](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I95B14090E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Fire Brigades Union considered. Parliamentary sovereignty would be undermined if the executive could prevent Parliament from exercising legislative authority for as long as it pleased. The principle of governmental accountability to Parliament was equally fundamental, _[R. (on the application of Miller) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union [2017] UKSC 5, [2018] A.C. 61, [2017] 1 WLUK 387](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I50414490E22911E6A3D3C1EB315B418F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. While Parliament did not expect to be in permanent session, the longer it stood prorogued, the greater the risk of unaccountable government. Accordingly, a decision to prorogue would be unlawful if prorogation had the effect of frustrating or preventing, without reasonable justification, Parliament's ability to carry out its constitutional functions as a legislature and as the body responsible for supervising the executive. The court would intervene if the effect was sufficiently serious to justify such an exceptional course, _[R. (on the application of Unison) v Lord Chancellor [2017] UKSC 51, [2020] A.C. 869, [2017] 7 WLUK 601](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFCECFE2071EC11E78D07B3DA340AF2B2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Whether Parliament's functions were frustrated was a question of fact. If they were frustrated, the court then had to decide whether the Prime Minister's explanation for his advice was reasonable justification for prorogation having those effects. The Prime Minister's wish to begin a new session would normally justify the short prorogations which were usual in modern practice. Only in unusual circumstances might further justification be necessary. The court had to be sensitive to the Prime Minister's responsibilities, but it was its responsibility to determine whether he had remained within the legal limits of the power. The lawfulness of the advice was justiciable (paras [38-52](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Lawfulness of advice -** The Prime Minister's action had the effect of frustrating or preventing Parliament's role in holding the Government to account. The prorogation was not a normal one preceding a Queen's speech. It prevented Parliament carrying out its role for five out of eight weeks between the end of its summer recess and 31 October. Although Parliament could have decided to go into recess during that period, it could have declined to do so or curtailed any recess. Even during a recess, Parliament could have held the Government to account; prorogation meant that it could not do that. The circumstances were exceptional. A fundamental change to the constitution was due to take place on 31 October; Parliament had a right to a voice in how that change came about. The Government's documents did not suggest that it needed five weeks to prepare the speech. They did not discuss prorogation's impact on what Parliament might have wished to do. There had been no reason to advise a five-week prorogation. The decision was unlawful (paras [55-61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Could the court declare prorogation null?** The [Bill of Rights 1688 art.9](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA1F061A0E44611DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the [Claim of Right 1689](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I236190E01E8011E28ECD84DDCF27183E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default)) precluded courts from questioning proceedings in Parliament. However, it was for the court to determine the scope of parliamentary privilege; it was necessary to consider whether denying an action privilege was likely to affect the core business of Parliament; and Parliament's privileged "exclusive cognisance" referred to its right to manage its affairs without outside interference, _[R. v Chaytor (David) [2010] UKSC 52, [2011] 1 A.C. 684, [2010] 12 WLUK 48](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID1C65F20ED4111DF901D8397EA4D525A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=aefb45ccf6d243d4aa48e050c38b8fc1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Prorogation was not a proceeding in Parliament. It was imposed upon it from outside. It was not the core business of Parliament; it brought business to an end. The court was not precluded from considering the prorogation's validity (paras [62-69](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Effect of judgment -** The advice had been outside the Prime Minister's powers, so it was null and of no effect. The Order in Council was therefore likewise null and should be quashed. The prorogation itself was accordingly also null. The court would declare that Parliament had not been prorogued. Each house's speaker could take immediate steps to enable it to meet as soon as possible (paras [69-70](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).