### Summary

In the circumstances the appellant asylum seekers did not have enforceable legitimate expectations that the secretary of state's Third Country Family Links Policy would be applied so that their asylum claims fell to be considered substantively in the United Kingdom rather than in Germany or Italy.

### Abstract

The first appellant (N), a Sri Lankan national, appealed against a decision ([2002] EWHC 2595, [2003] Imm. A.R. 373) that he fell outside the secretary of state's Third Country Family Links Policy and sought an order to quash the refusal to decide his asylum substantively in the United Kingdom. The second appellant (B), a Somali national, appealed against a decision ([2003] EWHC 2921) that there would be no breach of the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default)) in returning her to Italy. N had illegally entered the UK and was detained after unsuccessfully claiming asylum. N's wife entered the UK and was also refused asylum. The secretary of state found that N's case fell outside the family links policy and sought to remove N to Germany. The family links policy was subsequently revised. The court found that the secretary of state had misinterpreted the family links policy and should have accepted that N's wife was an asylum seeker within the policy, but that N had no right to have his claim reconsidered. B claimed asylum and made a claim to remain in the UK in reliance on Art.8 by virtue of her mother and sister being resident in the UK. Permission to enter as the dependant minor child of a settled refugee was refused on the ground that documents in the possession of the secretary of state showed that B had lied about her age and her identity and was no longer a minor. The court found that in light of B's "undoubted deception" it would be wrong for the court not to uphold the certificate issued in relation to B under the [Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 s.72](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA7A29E60E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default)) and to remove her to Italy. N and B submitted that (1) they enjoyed an enforceable legitimate expectation that the family links policy would be applied so that their asylum claims fell to be considered substantively in the UK rather than in Germany or Italy. N further submitted that the family links policy in its original form, on its proper construction as the judge ascertained it, applied to him at the time of the secretary of state's relevant decisions and ought to have been applied to him. B submitted that (2) quite apart from any impact of the family links policy, the judge was wrong to find that, even if an adjudicator did believe her account as to her age and identity, he would still have been bound to conclude that there was no breach of Art.8 in returning her to Italy.

Held, dismissing the appeals, that 

(1) in relation to N, he did indeed fall within the family links policy as ascertained by the judge, but the secretary of state acted upon his own interpretation of the policy honestly and consistently and now sought to do no more than give effect to it as he had always conceived it to be. N had made no reliance whatever on the policy until after the relevant decision had been made. There was no abuse of power on the part of the secretary of state, and nothing in terms of legitimate expectation to entitle N to a judgment compelling the secretary of state to apply the unrevised family links policy in the instant case. In relation to B, the secretary of state never considered whether the family links policy should be disapplied on particular grounds, because on his view of the facts, particularly B's date of birth, the policy in any event had no application. The secretary of state was perfectly entitled to conclude that B's date of birth was not as she claimed, and the argument to the effect that that was an irrational conclusion should never have been advanced. B's appeal had no merit. 

(2) The judge's findings were correct. B had lied her way into the UK. She had no entitlement under the immigration rules to enter the UK without an entry clearance, for which she should have applied in the ordinary way. The judge's conclusion was wholly in line with the judgment in _[Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 105, [2006] Q.B. 1, [2005] 3 WLUK 71](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC4411CF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , Huang applied. 

(3) (Obiter) The theme that was current in legitimate expectation cases was that where a public authority had issued a promise or adopted a practice that represented how it proposed to act in a given area, the law required the promise or practice to be honoured unless there was a good reason not to do so. The principle behind that proposition was a requirement of good administration, by which public bodies ought to deal in a straightforward and consistent manner with the public. That was a legal standard that, although not to be found in the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default)) , took its place alongside such rights as the right to a fair trial and no punishment without law. That standard might only be departed from in circumstances where to do so was the public body's legal duty or was otherwise a proportionate response having regard to a legitimate aim pursued by the public body in the public interest, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Hargreaves [1997] 1 W.L.R. 906, [1996] 11 WLUK 307](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65810531E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Findlay, Re [1985] A.C. 318, [1984] 11 WLUK 136](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA6B8D740E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[R. v North and East Devon HA Ex p. Coughlan [2001] Q.B. 213, [1999] 7 WLUK 371](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B8B1FC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Attorney General of Hong Kong v Ng Yuen Shiu [1983] 2 A.C. 629, [1983] 2 WLUK 197](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69BD1DB0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=5ecf1c23b1ad4316b46b3e0d3638bd02&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.