### Summary

Second World War captives of Japanese - Qualification for compensation - Claimant association appealed decision refusing judicial review of secretary of state's decision - Correct test of Wednesbury unreasonableness had been applied - No breach of European Convention on Human Rights Art 14.

### Abstract

ABCIFER, the Association of British Civilian Internees Far Eastern Region which represented civilians interned by the Japanese during the Second World War, appealed against the refusal of its application for judicial review ([2002] EWHC 2119, Independent, October 31, 2002) of the Secretary of State's refusal to pay a non statutory ex gratia compensation payment of GBP 10,000 to a number of individuals. The individuals had been interned as British civilians but were refused compensation because neither they nor their parents or grandparents were born in the UK. ABCIFER submitted that proportionality had supplanted the Wednesbury test in English domestic law even where no human rights or EC law issues were raised. ABCIFER argued that it was irrational to adopt the criterion that a claimant should have had close links with the UK at the time of internment and that it was irrational to use the chosen birth criteria. ABCIFER contended that the birth criteria ignored the close links that claimants had developed with the UK since the War.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that the Wednesbury test survived and was the correct test to apply where Community Law and rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b1e83c2f4044f6da221f877579db57b&contextData=(sc.Default)) were not involved, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Brind [1991] 1 A.C. 696, [1991] 2 WLUK 89](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I657397B0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b1e83c2f4044f6da221f877579db57b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. It was a matter for the House of Lords to lay to rest the Wednesbury test. The criteria were required to do no more than rationally define the means by which a claimant had to demonstrate a close connection with the UK at the time of internment. The Secretary of State had not acted irrationally in introducing the birth criteria, _[Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 K.B. 223, [1947] 11 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I68410501E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6b1e83c2f4044f6da221f877579db57b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.