The managers of a private psychiatric hospital were deemed to be exercising a public function when they changed the focus of one of its wards from providing psychotherapeutic services to one primarily designed to treat patients with mental illness. The court noted that the private hospital’s services were subject to specific 'statutory underpinning'. It was under a direct on-going statutory duty to provide adequate professional staff and treatment facilities. Its decision was therefore amenable to JR.

---

### Summary

The decision of the managers of a private psychiatric hospital, which admitted patients under the Mental Health Act 1983 s.3, to alter the nature of care provided in one of its wards was an act of a public nature and therefore susceptible to judicial review.

### Abstract

In proceedings brought by A, a woman with a severe personality disorder, seeking judicial review of the decision of the managers of a private psychiatric hospital to alter the nature of care provided in one of its wards, the preliminary issue arose as to whether the decision had been made "in relation to the exercise of a public function" within the meaning of the [Civil Procedure Rules 1998 Part 54 r.54.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I11875790E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=59a493ccbc114d60a76d9b0f45747bf9&contextData=(sc.Search)) and was therefore susceptible to judicial review. The hospital had been registered as a mental nursing home under the provisions of the [Registered Homes Act 1984 Part II](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60200370E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=59a493ccbc114d60a76d9b0f45747bf9&contextData=(sc.Search)) and admitted patients under the [Mental Health Act 1983 s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3FA483B0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=59a493ccbc114d60a76d9b0f45747bf9&contextData=(sc.Search)). A, whose placement at the hospital was funded by her local health authority, maintained that the ward had been intended to be a single unit dedicated to working therapeutically with female patients with a primary diagnosis of personality disorder. According to A, the decision of the managers to change the focus of the ward meant that it would cater for women with a primary diagnosis of mental illness. The provision of care for such persons differed from that provided to those with a primary diagnosis of personality disorder.

Held, determining the preliminary issue in favour of A, that the decision of the managers was an act of a public nature and therefore susceptible to judicial review. While decisions relating to treatment were clinical in nature, decisions relating to the facilities provided and whether the hospital had adequate staff with the appropriate training were another matter; since the hospital was registered under the 1984 Act, such a decision was subject to the statutory duty imposed under the [Nursing Homes and Mental Nursing Homes Regulations 1984 Reg.12(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5A3FE2A0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=59a493ccbc114d60a76d9b0f45747bf9&contextData=(sc.Search)) to provide adequate professional staff and treatment facilities. Furthermore, there was a public interest in the care and treatment provided by the hospital given that as a result of any deficiencies, a patient detained pursuant to the 1983 Act might have their detention prolonged or their recovery might be hindered. Accordingly, the managers of the hospital were a "functional" public authority, _[Poplar Housing & Regeneration Community Association Ltd v Donoghue [2001] EWCA Civ 595, [2002] Q.B. 48, [2001] 4 WLUK 491](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I23AFF5D1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=59a493ccbc114d60a76d9b0f45747bf9&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[R. (on the application of Heather) v Leonard Cheshire Foundation [2001] EWHC Admin 429, (2001) 4 C.C.L. Rep. 211, [2001] 6 WLUK 350](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I799DF230E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=59a493ccbc114d60a76d9b0f45747bf9&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered.
