### Summary

Though it had been rational to respond to abuse by changing the registration criteria for doctors trained overseas even without transitional provision, the claimant had a legitimate expectation that he could rely on individual and specific assurances that he would be allowed to register on completion of his training.

### Abstract

P appealed against a decision (_[[2012] EWHC 2120 (Admin)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB8AD4D20D77B11E1B2B7C31751EF1894/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default))_) dismissing his application for judicial review of the refusal of the General Medical Council (GMC) to accept his Primary Medical Qualification (PMQ) from a Caribbean university (U) as an acceptable overseas qualification.

P contacted the GMC to establish if his proposed course of study was acceptable and received replies confirming that it would be. He performed his pre-clinical studies by distance learning at U and then completed his supervised clinical rotations at United Kingdom hospitals. He estimated his expenditure at $40,000 over six years of study. Registration of his PMQ was subsequently refused because the registration criteria had been changed.

P submitted that (1) the court below had erred in finding that the GMC had not unlawfully fettered its discretion by defining the acceptable overseas qualification by reference to criteria that did not allow exceptions, whereas the wording of the [Medical Act 1983 s.21B(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38A528812DB511DBA7A5D2D2AF4DCED8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.21C(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38A59DB02DB511DBA7A5D2D2AF4DCED8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)) conferred a general discretion to consider exceptional cases such as his; (2) the judge had erred in holding that the retrospective change in the requirement was not irrational or arbitrary even though it imposed blanket criteria, which excluded high quality candidates with the requisite knowledge and skill; (3) the refusal to recognise P's qualification was contrary to the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Protocol 1 art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0533456A00444191AD7532EBEB1571A4/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)); (4) the refusal to recognise P's PMQ after confirming by email that it would, was a breach of his legitimate expectation.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The judge had been correct to decide that neither [s.21B(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38A528812DB511DBA7A5D2D2AF4DCED8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)) nor [s.21C(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38A59DB02DB511DBA7A5D2D2AF4DCED8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1983 Act gave the GMC a discretion to allow registration where the criteria had not been satisfied, rather they provided a discretion to refuse registration even where the criteria had been satisfied. Parliament's intention was that the GMC, as an expert body, should set minimum criteria for registration. Although the exercise of that judgement had to be reasonable, the boundaries were wide enough to include the criteria that any PMQ had to satisfy and there was no unlawful fettering of discretion by G, _[R. v Specialist Training Authority of the Medical Royal Colleges Ex p. British Medical Association [1999] Ed. C.R. 661, [1998] 11 WLUK 83](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I93BEC190E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (see paras [31-34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The retrospective change was not irrational when examined in its context, which included the absence of universally recognised standards for PMQs, Parliament's intention that G had to provide criteria for accepting PMQs, and the impracticability of verifying the many PMQs issued around the world. Nor was the lack of transitional provision irrational, as G was entitled to change the criteria with immediate effect if necessary (paras [36-37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) Article 2 of Protocol 1 was not engaged and, therefore, resort to principles of proportionality was not appropriate, [Belgian Linguistic Case (A/6) (1979-80) 1 E.H.R.R. 252, [1968] 7 WLUK 102](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7326EFC0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)) [R. (on the application of Sivills) v General Social Care Council [2007] EWHC 2576 (Admin), [2007] 10 WLUK 177](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I22EBEBF08E8A11DC9CEDA458CF7668E4/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default))_and _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Brind [1991] 1 A.C. 696, [1991] 2 WLUK 89](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I657397B0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (para.[38](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) P had received a clear, unequivocal, and unqualified assurance from G that if he completed the proposed course in a reasonable time his qualification would be recognised. The [Medical Act 1983](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60244930E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=791511d7a07a41e2aeb6a896df4c8d6d&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not exclude the principle of legitimate expectation and the statutory duty had to be exercised in accordance with established principles of substantive fairness. It had not been open to G to change its policy without adopting some transitional provision for P. There was no public interest which outweighed the unfairness of refusing to honour the assurance given and to recognise P's qualification (para.[85](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The relief granted was specific to P and compelled G to recognise his PMQ (para.[93](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).