In Rashid the court held that in the circumstances, where they had found conspicuous unfairness amounting to an abuse of power, it would be grossly unfair for the applicant to be stopped from seeking to enforce an expectation because he had not heard about the relevant policy at the time his case was first considered by the Home Office.

---

### Summary

There was a legitimate expectation in a claimant for asylum that the Secretary of State would apply his policy on asylum to the claim, irrespective of whether or not the claimant was aware of the policy.

### Abstract

The appellant Secretary of State appealed against the granting of the application for judicial review ([2004] EWHC 2465, Times, November 17, 2004) made by the respondent (R), an Iraqi Kurd, of the decisions of the Secretary of State refusing refugee status to R. The successful claim for judicial review had been made on the basis that if at any time between R's arrival and the date he had sought reconsideration of his original request for asylum, the asylum policy which ought to have been applied had been applied, R would have been granted asylum. The policy in question stated that internal relocation to the former Kurdish Autonomous Zone from government controlled Iraq would not be advanced as a reason to refuse a claim for refugee status. The decisions made in relation to R's original application for asylum had been based on the availability of internal relocation. The Secretary of State, by reference to the principle in _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Ravichandran (No.1) [1996] Imm. A.R. 97, [1995] 10 WLUK 109](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9135A5B0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1748de1ea9974421a78824ae2018787a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, upheld the original decision on the ground that the situation in Iraq had changed as a result of the change in regime. In granting the application for judicial review the judge had taken the view that the combination of the Secretary of State's failure to apply the policy to R's original asylum application, and the granting of the applications of two asylum seekers whose cases were identical to that of R, and the intervening moral detriment occasioned to R, when taken together, connoted such a degree of unfairness as to amount to a misuse of power. R argued that the real issue was whether there had been such conspicuous unfairness by the Secretary of State as to amount to an abuse of power; R had a legitimate expectation that the correct policy would be applied, which had not been met because of a catalogue of serious administrative errors. The Secretary of State argued that a generalised recourse to unfairness was insufficient to found relief; circumstances had changed and, while the original refusals of refugee status had had a false basis, the decision made on the reconsideration had been correct because it had been made at a time when there had been no risk that R would be persecuted in Iraq.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that there was plainly a legitimate expectation in a claimant for asylum that the Secretary of State would apply his policy on asylum to the claim. Whether or not the claimant knew of the policy was not relevant. It would be grossly unfair if the court's ability to intervene depended at all upon the claimant's knowledge of a policy, especially where, as in the instant case, the policy was unknown to the relevant Home Office officials, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Ahmed (Mohammed Hussain) [1999] Imm. A.R. 22, [1998] 7 WLUK 616](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I90E2A3B0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1748de1ea9974421a78824ae2018787a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[R. v North and East Devon HA Ex p. Coughlan [2001] Q.B. 213, [1999] 7 WLUK 371](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B8B1FC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1748de1ea9974421a78824ae2018787a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. (on the application of Bibi) v Newham LBC (No.1) [2001] EWCA Civ 607, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 237, [2001] 4 WLUK 438](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I789052C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1748de1ea9974421a78824ae2018787a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Ravichandran considered. R had suffered a detriment in consequence of the loss of the right to remain in the United Kingdom, which would have been granted but for the errors made. It was difficult to understand the failure to apply the correct policy over such a long period, or why a fundamental element in the asylum policy relating to Iraqi applicants had been unknown to all those who deal with R's case. The failure to notify the adjudicator, the Immigration Review Tribunal, counsel for the Secretary of State or, until shortly before a Court of Appeal hearing, the courts involved in R's case demonstrated the gross nature of the errors. These serious errors in administration had resulted in conspicuous unfairness to R. In the instant case, the unfairness was such as to amount to an abuse of power requiring the intervention of the court. In reaching that conclusion, the court had taken into account the persistence of the conduct and the lack of explanation for it. Although it was not appropriate for the court to make a declaration that R was entitled to refugee status, it should declare that he was entitled to a grant of indefinite leave to remain in the UK; thereby providing a remedy for the unfairness which was an appropriate response in the circumstances.