Section 60 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 empowered a senior police officer to make a stop and search authorisation for 24 hours where he reasonably believed that incidents involving serious violence may take place in his locality and that it was expedient to give an authorisation to prevent their occurrence. Once an authorisation had been granted, police officers could stop and search any pedestrian or vehicle in that area for offensive weapons or dangerous instruments. They did not need to have any grounds for suspecting that the individual person or vehicle was carrying weapons. This power was challenged by a youth support worker who had been searched, after having failed to pay a bus fare.

The Supreme Court noted the benefits of random searches in detecting weapons and held that the combination of the requirements in the 1994 Act itself, the relevant provisions of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (‘PACE’), and other relevant codes, including the Equality Act, ensured that there were stronger safeguards against abuse than were present in Gillan. The powers under s. 60 of the 1994 Act were therefore not deemed incompatible with article 8.

---

### Summary

The power given to police under the [Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 s.60](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBD952F60E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)) to stop and search people or vehicles for offensive weapons was compatible with [ECHR art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)). The safeguards surrounding the use of the power, such as the requirement to give reasons for the search and for the s.60 authorisation, made it possible to judge whether the power had been exercised lawfully.

### Abstract

The appellant (R) appealed against a decision (_[[2014] EWCA Civ 69, [2014] 1 W.L.R. 3299](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF6443A508DF411E38F9AAD020981D9DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the stop and search powers conferred by the [Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 s.60](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBD952F60E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)) were compatible with [ECHR art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)).

R was a woman of African-Caribbean heritage. She had been travelling on a bus in the London borough of Haringey without a ticket. She gave the ticket inspector a false name and address and told him that she was not carrying any proof of identity. The ticket inspector called the police. A police officer noted that R kept a tight hold of her bag and appeared nervous. The officer considered that she might be carrying an offensive weapon. Due to recent gang-related violence in the area, a s.60 authorisation was in force, empowering uniformed police officers to stop and search any pedestrian for offensive weapons or dangerous instruments. Pursuant to that authorisation, the police officer decided to search R's bag. When R tried to resist, she was handcuffed and her bag was searched. R claimed that s.60 was incompatible with art.5 and art.8 of the Convention.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) A police officer's powers under s.60 depended upon a general authorisation given by an officer of the rank of inspector or above, for a period of up to 24 hours, within a particular locality, where the senior officer reasonably believed that one or more of the three grounds set out in s.60(1) existed. Section 60(5) made it clear that the individual police officer operating under such an authorisation did not have to have any grounds for suspecting that the person or vehicle stopped and searched was carrying offensive weapons. However, his purpose had to be to search for such things (see para.[6](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) It was common ground that the power to stop and search, without grounds for suspicion, was an interference with the right to respect for private life protected by art.8. The power pursued the legitimate aim of preventing disorder or crime. The issue was whether it was "in accordance with the law" as required by art.8(2) (para.[3](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) Any random "suspicionless" power of stop and search carried with it the risk that it would be used in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. However, it was the randomness of the search which had the deterrent effect, and increased the chance that weapons would be detected. The power had to be lawfully used and the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)) made it unlawful for a police officer to act in a manner which was incompatible with the Convention rights of any individual. That had to be read in conjunction with the [Equality Act 2010](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I41441D70491811DFA976CC93D6A34407/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default)) which made it unlawful for a police officer to discriminate on racial grounds in the exercise of his powers. It was said that, without the need to have reasonable grounds for suspecting the person stopped to be carrying a weapon, it was hard to judge the proportionality of the stop. However, the 1994 Act, PACE and the police standard operating procedures guarded against the risk that the officer would not have good reasons for the decision. The result of breaching them would, in many cases, be to render the stop and search unlawful, and expose the officers concerned to disciplinary action (paras [41-43](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) The requirements attached to the s.60 authorisation, the operation and the actual encounter on the street, in particular the requirement to give reasons both for the authorisation and for the stop, made it possible to judge whether the action "was necessary in a democratic society ... for the prevention of disorder or crime". No system of safeguards could guarantee that no one would ever act unlawfully, but if they did so, the individual would have a remedy. The law under s.60 was not incompatible with Convention rights, _[Colon v Netherlands (49458/06 (2012) 55 E.H.R.R. SE5, [2012] 5 WLUK 442](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I61160430D52311E1A085ACF643AAFD83/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Beghal v DPP [2015] UKSC 49, [2016] A.C. 88, [2015] 7 WLUK 726](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I61DD0810305F11E5A33281B869303887/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=56336bbe4fd04121abf9e1f7cd1b8996&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.