### Summary

The Jobseeker's Allowance (Employment, Skills and Enterprise Scheme) Regulations 2011 were invalid in that they did not contain a sufficiently detailed description of two "work for your benefit schemes" made thereunder, namely the "sector-based work academy scheme" and the "community action programme".

### Abstract

The appellant secretary of state appealed against a decision of the Court of Appeal (_[[2013] EWCA Civ 66, [2013] 1 W.L.R. 2239](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBDE2F76075A811E284ABA7A7CB14D345/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7cfdecca833a4593b05cda7d748840da&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the Jobseeker’s Allowance (Employment, Skills and Enterprise Scheme) Regulations 2011 did not comply with the requirements of the [Jobseekers Act 1995 s.17A](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF58D390EAC311DEA4D682E4EA06C6E8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7cfdecca833a4593b05cda7d748840da&contextData=(sc.Default)). The respondents (R and W) cross-appealed against the Court of Appeal’s decision that the policy underlying the schemes had been sufficiently publicised and there had been no breach of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3410BEEEEFB944EDB3941E81A0AEA7D1/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7cfdecca833a4593b05cda7d748840da&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The secretary of state had purportedly made the Regulations under s.17A of the Act, which envisaged the making of Regulations requiring benefit claimants to participate, in prescribed circumstances, in unpaid "work for your benefits" schemes on pain of losing their benefits. A number of such schemes were made under the 2011 Regulations. Those at issue in the instant case were the sector-based work academy (SBWA) scheme and the community action programme (CAP). R had participated in the former, believing participation to be mandatory. W had refused to take part in the latter and, as a result, had been deprived of his jobseeker's allowance for six months. 

R and W sought judicial review, arguing that 
(i) the Regulations were unlawful in that they did not fulfil the requirements of s.17A of the Act; 
(ii) the notification requirements in reg.4 had not been complied with in respect of W; 
(iii) the secretary of state ought to have publicised the criteria by which she exercised her power to require a person to participate in the schemes; and 
(iv) R had been subject to forced or compulsory labour contrary to art.4 of the Convention. 

The Court of Appeal found for R and W on the first two grounds and quashed the Regulations. The secretary of state appealed, with R cross-appealing on the third and fourth grounds.

### Held

Appeal dismissed, cross-appeal allowed in part.

(1) The Court of Appeal's decision on ground (i) would be upheld. Whether the Regulations satisfied the requirements of s.17A(1) depended on whether reg.2 contained a sufficiently "prescribed description" of the SBWA scheme and the CAP. It did not. Even bearing in mind that there was a need for flexibility in the precise characteristics of any scheme introduced under s.17A, it was clear that reg.2 did not satisfy the requirements of s.17A(1). Where a statute envisaged the making of Regulations that would have a significant impact on the lives of many people, legal certainty was crucially important. The secretary of state could have done significantly more to describe the individual schemes. On that basis, the Regulations were ultra vires s.17A(1) (see paras [43-50](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The Court of Appeal's decision on ground (ii) would also be upheld. The secretary of state's notification of the CAP to W did not comply with reg.4(2)(c), though W's allegation that it also breached reg.4(2)(e) was not made out. W had simply been told that he had to perform "any activities" requested of him by the scheme's administrator; he had not been given any idea of the likely nature of the tasks or the hours or place of work. That fell some way short of what was required by reg.4(2)(c). In terms of notification of sanction for the purposes of reg.4(2)(e), W had been told that he risked losing up to 26 weeks' benefit if he did not participate. He had not been significantly prejudiced or misled, and any imperfections in the notice were insufficient to invalidate it (paras [54-57](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) The Court of Appeal's decision on ground (iii) could not stand. The administration of a scheme by which a person might be required to engage in unpaid work on pain of losing his benefits was of significance both to that person and to the public. Fairness required that a benefit claimant should have such information about the scheme as he might need in order to make informed and meaningful representations before any decision was made, _[R. (on the application of Salih) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWHC 2273 (QB), Times, October 13, 2003, [2003] 10 WLUK 213](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7F0D6520E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7cfdecca833a4593b05cda7d748840da&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 12, [2012] 1 A.C. 245, [2011] 3 WLUK 727](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I58C1BD7055AD11E0949F969DFC71BFB0/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7cfdecca833a4593b05cda7d748840da&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. That had not been done in the instant case. It was not, however, necessary to grant relief by way of a formal declaration. It would be wrong for the court to be prescriptive as to how the necessary information should be given. If a lack of information deprived the claimant of the opportunity of making representations which could have led to a different outcome, it would normally be unjust to allow the notice to stand. If it was immaterial on the facts, justice would not require the notice to be set aside (paras [59-65, 74-76](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) The Court of Appeal's decision on ground (iv) would be upheld. The concept of exploitation lay at the heart of art.4. In the instant case, a condition had been imposed on the payment of a state benefit. The purpose of the condition was directly linked to the purpose of the benefit, and the provision of a conditional benefit of that kind did not come close to the type of exploitative conduct at which art.4 was aimed, _[Van der Mussele v Belgium (8919/80) (1984) 6 E.H.R.R. 163, [1983] 11 WLUK 238](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE6898D50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7cfdecca833a4593b05cda7d748840da&contextData=(sc.Default))__X v Netherlands (7602/1976) (1976) 7 D. & R. 161__Talmon v Netherlands (30300/96) unreported_and _Schuitemaker v Netherlands (15906/08) unreported_considered (paras [81-91](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).