The applicants appealed against a decision upholding the refusal of the Parole Board to hold oral hearings in respect of their opposition to the revocation of their licences.

**Held:** It was acknowledged that the Parole Board was not required to hold an oral hearing every time a prisoner released on licence resisted his recall to prison. It was held, however, that where the Parole Board would be assisted in its task of assessing risk by having an oral hearing, for example to assess character or to allow the prisoner the opportunity to raise mitigating factors, this should be done. The case raised important issues of both common law fairness and the right to a fair legal process under Article 6 of the ECHR.

---

### Summary

While the common law duty of procedural fairness did not require the Parole Board to hold an oral hearing in every case where a determinate sentence prisoner released on licence resisted his recall to prison, the Parole Board's duty was not as constricted as had hitherto been held and assumed.

### Abstract

The appellants (S and W), formerly prisoners serving determinate sentences, appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 1641, [2003] 1 W.L.R. 705) upholding the refusal of the Parole Board to hold oral hearings in respect of their opposition to the revocation of their licences. W had been sentenced to three years' imprisonment for affray. He was released on licence after serving half the sentence. W's licence had been revoked and he had been recalled to prison following allegations that he had breached the terms of his licence by visiting his former partner, staying other than at his approved address and failing to keep an appointment with his probation officer. W's solicitors had made written representations on his behalf and requested an oral hearing because W wanted to explore the facts which the probation officer alleged justified the recall. The board rejected W's version of the facts and declined to hold a hearing. W served the remaining eight months of the licence period before being released. S had been sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for rape and making threats to kill. He was released on licence but recalled because although he had otherwise complied with his licence conditions, he had tested positive on two occasions for class A drugs. S's solicitors made lengthy written representations to the board, although they did not request an oral hearing. S's application for release was refused by the board and he served the remaining 22 months of his sentence. S and W argued that where a prisoner sought to resist the revocation of his licence, the board should offer an oral hearing at which the prisoner could present his arguments. The failure to offer that opportunity was procedurally unfair and contravened the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8cfd2f00d3ca401a97451dc9695934a4&contextData=(sc.Default)) and both the civil and criminal limbs of Sch.1 Part I Art.6.

Held, allowing the appeals, that while the common law duty of procedural fairness did not require the board to hold an oral hearing in every case where a determinate sentence prisoner released on licence resisted his recall to prison, the board's duty was not as constricted as had hitherto been held and assumed. Even if important facts were not in dispute, they might be open to explanation or mitigation, or might lose some of their significance in the light of other new facts. While the board's task was certainly to assess risk, it might well be greatly assisted in discharging that task by exposure to the prisoner or the questioning of those who had dealt with him. It could often be very difficult to address effective representations without knowing the points which were troubling the decision maker. The prisoner should have the benefit of a procedure which fairly reflected, on the facts of his case, the importance of what was at stake for him and for society. In the instant case, S and W should have been offered an oral hearing. 

(2) It was plain that in cases such as the instant case, the sentence of the trial court satisfied Art.5(1) not only in relation to the initial term served by the prisoner but also in relation to revocation and recall, since conditional release subject to the possibility of recall formed an integral component of the composite sentence passed by the court. Further, the board's review of a recall would satisfy the requirements of Art.5(4) provided that it was conducted in a manner which met the requirement of procedural fairness. 

(3) As to Art.6, while a challenge to the revocation of a licence could lead to detention imposed to protect the public, it could not lead to punishment; it could not therefore be said that a revocation hearing involved the determination of a criminal charge. The question whether the civil right under Art.6(1) was engaged had to be decided in the light of the proceedings that were in issue and the nature of the dispute. The Art.6 civil right was not infringed by proceedings of the kind that were in issue in the instant case, so long as the individual had access to the domestic courts to assert his right to liberty. The proceedings of the board did not deprive S or W of that right of access.