The appellant was a mandatory life sentence prisoner who had been convicted of murder. He was diagnosed with cancer of the colon and was receiving medication from the healthcare centre at the prison.

He alleged that the Secretary of State's failure to release him on compassionate grounds interfered with his attendance for chemotherapy at hospital and attendance at a hospice for counselling and therefore amounted to a breach of article 3. The Court of Appeal stated that, to show a breach, the conduct on the part of the state must be of a serious and wholly unacceptable kind. The threshold had not been reached in its view in this case.

---

### Summary

There was no obligation on the secretary of state to consult the Parole Board before making a decision as to whether there were circumstances to justify a prisoner's release under the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.30, and the Parole Board had no role to investigate alleged breaches of Art.3 rights since that was the role of the court. In the instant case there had not been any Art.3 breaches established by the secretary of state's decision not to release the appellant on compassionate grounds due to illness.

### Abstract

The appellant (S) appealed against a decision ([2004] EWHC 2916) refusing to quash a decision of the defendant secretary of state to refuse to refer his case to the Parole Board to investigate an alleged breach of his rights under the Human rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.3 . S was serving life imprisonment and had been diagnosed with terminal cancer. He had sought his release on compassionate grounds under the [Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 s.30](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F2F2FB0E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=37b4bf6a4105487db436456bf7b073ae&contextData=(sc.Default)) , but the secretary of state refused; in part because S had represented a risk of reoffending, and in part because release would only be granted if there were the most exceptional circumstances and life expectancy was very short, criteria that S had not met. S sought judicial review of the secretary of state's decision on the ground that the refusal to grant his release had infringed his human rights under Art.3, and that accordingly there had to be an independent investigation carried out by the Parole Board into the alleged breach. The judge held that the procedural requirement to procure an effective official investigation into any alleged breach of rights under Art.3 was triggered by a specific historic event and required a real dispute of fact to be investigated. The Parole Board was not the appropriate body to carry out such an investigation in circumstances where a prisoner had sought release on compassionate grounds and where the real question for the Parole Board would be whether a prisoner's continued detention breached his human rights. S argued that (1) there was an obligation on the secretary of state under s.30(2) to consult the Parole Board before he reached any conclusion as to whether exceptional circumstances existed to justify release under s.30(1); (2) where there had been an arguable breach of Art.3, the State had an obligation to consider whether a breach had actually occurred and in making that consideration there had to be an independent investigation of those committing the breach which, S argued, was to be carried out by the Parole Board.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that 

(1) Under s.30, the secretary of state had the power to consider whether to release a prisoner on compassionate grounds. If he reached the conclusion not to release on that ground under s.30(1) the Parole Board had no role. The Parole Board's role only came into play if the secretary of state considered it appropriate to release the prisoner under s.30(1). Accordingly, there was no obligation on the secretary of state to consult the Parole Board before he made a decision under s.30(1). 

(2) S's argument that there was a continuing arguable breach of Art.3 that required investigation undervalued the obligation of the State, since it had not merely to investigate ongoing breaches but to terminate them. Cases that required investigation were such that the alleged breach had ceased, _[R. (on the application of Wright) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] EWHC Admin 520, [2002] H.R.L.R. 1, [2001] 6 WLUK 408](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7FC62DD0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=37b4bf6a4105487db436456bf7b073ae&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Accordingly, the instant case was not a type in which there would have existed an obligation to investigate since that would not have met the duty to cease the alleged breach. In any event, the Parole Board had no role in disciplining the secretary of state for Art.3 breaches. It was the role of the courts to determine whether a breach of Art.3 had occurred, or had been occurring, and to order its cessation. S had not established that the conditions imposed on him were a breach of Art.3, _[Mouisel v France (67263/01) (2004) 38 E.H.R.R. 34, [2002] 11 WLUK 419](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0617D1A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=37b4bf6a4105487db436456bf7b073ae&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished. In all the circumstances, the judge's decision was not shown to have been in error.