### Summary

An article of the European Convention on Human Rights 1950 other than Art.3 could be engaged in relation to a removal of an individual from the United Kingdom where the anticipated treatment in the receiving state would be in breach of the requirements of the Convention, but where such treatment did not meet the minimum requirements of Art.3. While not strictly binding, the courts should, in the absence of special circumstances, follow any clear and constant jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights.

### Abstract

The appellants, U and D, appealed against a decision ([2002] EWCA Civ 1856, [2003] 1 W.L.R. 770) in a conjoined appeal upholding the refusal of their asylum claims. Each had claimed a well founded fear of persecution in their home countries of Pakistan and Vietnam, as a result of their religious belief or practice. On subsequent appeals by U and D their alternative arguments, that removal to their own countries would constitute a breach of the [Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part I Art.9](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B36F6F0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b702d9505fb4026b24bf46fa007bd74&contextData=(sc.Default)) , were rejected. The Court of Appeal held that where the Convention was invoked on the sole ground of the treatment to which an alien was likely to be subjected by the receiving state, and that treatment was not sufficiently severe to engage Art.3, the English courts were not required to recognise that any other article of the Convention was or could be engaged.

Held, dismissing the appeals, that 

(1) an article of the Convention other than Art.3 could be engaged in relation to a removal of an individual from the UK where the anticipated treatment in the receiving state would be in breach of the requirements of the Convention, but such treatment did not meet the minimum requirements of Art.3. It was hard to think that a person could successfully resist expulsion in reliance on Art.9 without being entitled either to asylum on the ground of a well founded fear of persecution for reasons of religion or personal opinion, or to resist expulsion in reliance on Art.3. However, such a possibility could not be ruled out in principle unless the European Court of Human Rights had done so, which it had not, _[Abdulaziz v United Kingdom (A/94) (1985) 7 E.H.R.R. 471, [1985] 5 WLUK 295](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I47895150E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b702d9505fb4026b24bf46fa007bd74&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Soering v United Kingdom (A/161) (1989) 11 E.H.R.R. 439, [1989] 7 WLUK 64](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB66BE500E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b702d9505fb4026b24bf46fa007bd74&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , and _[Bensaid v United Kingdom (44599/98) (2001) 33 E.H.R.R. 10, [2001] 2 WLUK 186](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I73B41490E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b702d9505fb4026b24bf46fa007bd74&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, and 

(2) successful reliance on articles other than Art.3 required a very strong case. The correct approach in cases involving qualified rights was that indicated by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal when it applied the criterion that the right in question would be completely denied or nullified by the alleged breach, _[Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 702, [2003] Imm. A.R. 1, [2002] 3 WLUK 304](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5A965720E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7b702d9505fb4026b24bf46fa007bd74&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. However, even assuming that Art.9 could be relied on to resist the expulsion in the instant case, U and D fell far short of showing facts capable of supporting such a claim. The adjudicators who upheld the Secretary of State's decisions in respect of U and D had erred neither in the facts they found nor the inferences they drew.