### Summary

Although a former teacher had a substantive legitimate expectation that no further action would be taken against him in the absence of further misconduct, a later decision by the Secretary of State for Education to bar him from working with children pursued a legitimate aim and was proportionate.

### Abstract

The claimant (W) applied for judicial review of the defendant secretary of state's decision to bar him from working with children.

W had worked as a teacher. After two pupils made allegations against W of assault and indecency, W received cautions for common assault. W was later charged with indecently assaulting another child but the case was stayed. W was informed by letter that the secretary of state would not take action against him under the [Education Act 2002 s.142](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5A7C8EC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default)), under which she could bar or restrict his employment, but that his details would remain on record and might be taken into account in the event of further misconduct. Subsequently, as part of an historical cases review intended to identify persons who might pose a risk to children, an expert panel referred W's case to the secretary of state to consider making a barring order against him. W made representations to the panel and was assessed. The secretary of state barred W, who by then lived in Hong Kong, pursuant to s.142. W's appeal against that decision to the Care Standards Tribunal was stayed. It was common ground that there was no evidence or allegation of any misconduct by W since he received the letter from the secretary of state.

W submitted that 
(1) the decision to bar him was taken in breach of a substantive legitimate expectation that no further action would be taken in the absence of further misconduct and that he had relied on that expectation, adversely impacting on his health; 
(2) the decision breached his rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1FBD48E5924705BFBD5299078ED2BC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Held

Application refused.

(1) The letter created a legitimate expectation that W would not have further action taken against him unless further misconduct came to the secretary of state's attention. The letter contained a representation to that effect which was clear, unambiguous and devoid of relevant qualification. That was how it would be understood by the person to whom it was addressed, _[Paponette v Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago [2010] UKPC 32, [2012] 1 A.C. 1, [2010] 12 WLUK 377](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I764D7740071911E0BBF9B4C910F12BB3/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (see para.[51](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). It was common ground that the test for determining whether the secretary of state had acted lawfully when acting inconsistently with a substantive legitimate expectation was whether there was a legitimate aim in the public interest and whether the secretary of state's conduct was proportionate, _[R. (on the application of Nadarajah) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, Times, December 14, 2005, [2005] 11 WLUK 580](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7E78C640E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Paponette considered. 

The public interest in protecting children from the risk of sexual abuse was a legitimate aim that was manifest and pressing. The availability of an appeal on the merits of the barring order was relevant to the question of whether the secretary of state's decision was proportionate. Further, the secretary of state did not simply resile from the legitimate expectation without more; he sought to devise fair procedures that would be followed before a barring order was imposed, which included the right to make representations, involvement of an expert panel, advice from a child protection charity and giving W the opportunity to have a face-to-face assessment. Any criticism of the views of those advising the secretary of state should be done in appeal proceedings before the tribunal. In any event, the Administrative Court should not entertain such a challenge on discretionary grounds as there was an adequate alternative remedy, _[R. (on the application of M) v Bromley LBC [2002] EWCA Civ 1113, [2002] 2 F.L.R. 802, [2002] 7 WLUK 433](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7A33A280E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The claim for judicial review was dismissed on that basis alone. However, it was also to be noted that the public interest lay in favour of allowing the tribunal to consider the case on its merits, R (on the application of M) considered. W's mental stress did not outweigh the overriding public interest, _[R. (on the application of Zeqiri) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ 342, [2002] Imm. A.R. 42, [2001] 3 WLUK 295](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7FD39B50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of Bibi) v Newham LBC (No.1) [2001] EWCA Civ 607, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 237, [2001] 4 WLUK 438](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I789052C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Therefore the decision was proportionate (paras [52-53, 55-58, 64-65, 67](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(2) It was necessary to consider whether W was entitled to rely on the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default)), given that he was living outside the United Kingdom at the time of the secretary of state's decision. The secretary of state exercised legal authority or jurisdiction over W by making a barring order, even though W was outside the UK, and could not then deny that W was entitled to rights under the 1998 Act. However, art.6 of the Convention took W's case nowhere as W's complaint was not about procedural unfairness. Further, although it was common ground that the decision constituted an interference with W's right to respect for private life contrary to [art.8(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e1f8975ad0104f34ae7f43dc8ad662c0&contextData=(sc.Default)), it was proportionate and justified and, accordingly, W's argument based on art.8 was rejected (paras [72-73, 76](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).