### Summary

The termination of a tenancy by a housing trust, a hybrid public authority that provided social housing, did not, having regard to various factors, constitute an act of private nature under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default)) and was in principle subject to human rights considerations.

### Abstract

The appellant housing trust (L) appealed against a decision ( _[[2008] EWHC 1377 (Admin), [2009] 1 All E.R. 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I46569EC0434111DD9B21D2EB69D4A35A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ ) that it was subject to human rights principles when terminating the tenancy of the respondent (W).

L was a registered social landlord, regulated by the Housing Corporation under the [Housing Act 1996](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FC7AA40E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default)) . It had corporate and charitable status. It provided social housing to those in need. It was funded by the income it received from rents and private borrowing, and grants that were principally social housing grants allocated by the corporation. Control over the housing stock rested with L but that was subject to allocation arrangements it made with the local authorities. The legal relationship between a tenant and L was typically defined by the tenancy agreement. W was served with an order for possession for rent arrears. She sought judicial review claiming that her eviction would interfere with her human rights. An issue arose as to whether L was a public body within the meaning of the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(3)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default)) . The Divisional Court found that L's act of management and allocation of housing stock was a public function and that the act of terminating the tenancy was not a private act under [s.6(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1998 Act. The main issue was whether, when terminating the tenancy of someone in social housing, L was subject to human rights principles.

W submitted that the act of termination was closely and inextricably linked to the function of allocation and that it would be artificial to separate it out and treat it as a private act merely because the tenancy itself was a contract.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(Rix L.J. dissenting) 

(1) The Divisional Court had focused on the wrong question, namely whether the act of management and allocation of housing was a public function such as to render L a hybrid public authority. It was conceded that L was a hybrid authority. The key question to determine whether W's human rights were engaged was whether the act of termination was a private act. When characterising the nature of the act, it was important to focus on the context in which the act occurred. Both the source and nature of the activities needed to be considered when deciding whether a function was public or private, _[L v Birmingham City Council [2007] UKHL 27, [2008] 1 A.C. 95, [2007] 6 WLUK 427](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I854EE0C01FAB11DCAFBDFE6E7D25BD1C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. In the instant case there were a number of features bringing the act of terminating a social tenancy within the purview of the 1998 Act. A starting point was to analyse L's function of allocating and managing housing, having regard to the extent to which in carrying out the relevant function the body was publicly funded, or was exercising statutory powers, or was taking the place of central government or local authorities or was providing a public service, _[Aston Cantlow and Wilmcote with Billesley Parochial Church Council v Wallbank [2003] UKHL 37, [2004] 1 A.C. 546, [2003] 6 WLUK 664](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I685A8070E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=bde4189d8aad4e32be4f810307028dd7&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. L significantly relied on public finance and, although not directly taking the place of local government, operated in very close harmony with it. The provision of subsidised housing was a governmental function. L was providing a public service. Further, it was acting in the public interest and had charitable objectives which placed it outside the traditional area of private commercial activity. The regulations to which it was subjected were designed, at least in part, to ensure that government objectives with respect to a vulnerable group in society were achieved. Considered cumulatively, those factors established sufficient public flavour to bring the provision of social housing by L within that concept. As regards the act of termination, it was so inextricably linked with the provision of social housing that once the latter was seen as the exercise of a public function, the acts which were necessarily involved in the regulation of the function were also public acts. The grant of a tenancy and its subsequent termination were part and parcel of determining who should be allowed to take advantage of the public benefit. The act of termination was not purely incidental to L's principal function. If an act were necessarily a private act because it involved the exercise of rights conferred by private law, that would significantly undermine the protection which Parliament intended to afford to potential victims of hybrid authorities. It would severely limit the significance of identifying certain bodies as hybrid authorities if the fact that the act under consideration was a contractual act meant that it was a private act falling within s.6(5) of the 1998 Act. Accordingly, the act of terminating W's tenancy did not constitute an act of a private nature and was in principle subject to human rights considerations. 

(2) The protection afforded by the 1998 Act would extend to all tenants of L who were in social housing and not just to those in properties that were acquired as a result of state grants. It did not necessarily follow that every housing trust providing social housing would necessarily be in the same position as L. The determination of the public status of a body was fact specific.