 In Doody, the court found that fairness required the Home Secretary to give reasons for refusing to allow the release of prisoners who had served their minimum sentences set by the trial judge for the purposes of retribution and deterrence.

 ---

The Secretary of State must inform prisoners who are serving mandatory life sentences how long a term has been recommended for them by the judiciary. Applicants who had received mandatory life sentences were told the minimum period they must serve before their sentences would be reviewed, but were not informed as to the recommendations of the judiciary as regards the length of their sentence. They applied for judicial review and this application was dismissed by the Divisional Court. The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal in part, declaring that the Home Secretary was required to inform the men of the recommended length of sentence, and to allow them to make representations concerning it, before any period of imprisonment could be determined.

Held, that the men must be allowed to know the recommended period, and make representations regarding it, before a fixed imprisonment period could be set (_[R. v Civil Service Appeal Board Ex p. Cunningham [1991] 4 All E.R. 310, [1991] 3 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3A6E41A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15881891016c4dd089f3c9362d5f04b1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v Parole Board for England and Wales Ex p. Wilson [1992] Q.B. 740, [1992] 1 WLUK 814](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2E6C5F90E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15881891016c4dd089f3c9362d5f04b1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved; _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Handscomb (1988) 86 Cr. App. R. 59, [1987] 3 WLUK 4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6580DE20E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15881891016c4dd089f3c9362d5f04b1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Payne v Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981] 1 W.L.R. 754, [1981] 3 WLUK 121](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1ADD5AB0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=15881891016c4dd089f3c9362d5f04b1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled).