A police authority was considering whether or not to retire a police officer because of disability. Before deciding, the authority was required to consult a doctor. The doctor chosen was someone who had already examined the officer in question on an earlier occasion and had concluded that he was suffering from a mental disorder.

As a result of this, the Court of Appeal held that he should not have been involved in the decision of the police authority, as he had already formed a view on the matter in question and would therefore have been unlikely to have advised the authority objectively.

---

The decision of a selected medical practitioner on questions referred to him under the [Police Pensions Regulations 1971reg.70(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I44E3B5B0B2FE11E68AE1963EC8A6EEB2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0d99ee4c21f640ad99b9b30ae6fbbbc8&contextData=(sc.Default)) is not the ordinary relationship of doctor and patient, but a decision of a judicial character and must conform to the rules of natural justice. G, a chief inspector of the Kent police force, made various accusations against his superiors, which led to an inquiry and report by P, the chief constable of another police force. The P report found the allegations unsubstantiated. Because of that and other matters, the deputy chief constable of Kent formed the opinion that G was mentally unstable and arranged for Dr. B, the chief medical officer of the force, to see him. Dr. B did so, and also saw the P report, came to the conclusion that G was suffering from a paranoid species of mental disorder, and certified him unfit for police duty. G's own consultant psychiatrist, without seeing the P report, adjudged him normal psychiatrically. A reference was made to a qualified medical practitioner by the Kent Police Authority under reg.70 (2) of the Police Pensions Regulations 1971, for the purpose of having G compulsorily retired on the grounds of permanent disablement. That practitioner was Dr. B. G refused to attend the interview and applied for an order of prohibition prohibiting Dr. B from determining the question, and an order of mandamus requiring the Kent Police Authority to disclose the P report to G and his medical advisers.

Held, the rules of natural justice must be complied with. The order of prohibition would issue, since Dr. B, having already committed himself to a view, could not bring an impartial judgment to bear. The order of mandamus would issue; G's own medical adviser was entitled to see any material placed before the appointed practitioner.