The relevant power in this case was given by the Local Government Act 1972, which allowed councils to manage common land for the 'benefit, improvement or development' of the area. Somerset Council decided to use the power to ban stag hunting for ethical reasons. The court found that the power could only be used to manage the deer herd, or to preserve or enhance the amenity of the area. The view that hunting was morally repulsive had nothing to do with such questions and so the court found that the Council had used its power unlawfully for an ‘improper purpose’.

---

SCC appealed against a ruling in the Queens Bench Division (Times, February 10, 1994; [1995] 1 All E.R. 513) that its decision to ban hunting on council owned land was unlawful.

Held: Appeal dismissed (Simon Brown L.J. dissenting). Any decision about the management of council land had to be taken on the basis of the statutory objectives specified in the [Local Government Act 1972 s.120](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2127E860E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=79dad9d37c104fce9114bbc43fde8ba9&contextData=(sc.Search)), i.e. for the benefit of the local area. A local authority did not have the same freedom as other landowners to permit or forbid activities on its land but was subject to constraints on its statutory powers. The court had been wrong to hold that moral considerations were necessarily irrelevant to the question of what would benefit the area. However, when debating any issue councillors should be reminded that the benefit of the area was the statutory basis for their decision and must understand that, however strongly held their personal views, they had to consider the proposals in terms of benefit and detriment to the area.