The [Rate Support Grant Order 1980](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I80AA8CA0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f55e53fd990b40ee94c8504e6526930a&contextData=(sc.Default)) is valid because it complies with the requirements of the [Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60351211E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f55e53fd990b40ee94c8504e6526930a&contextData=(sc.Default)) s.49 and s.50(2) but the Secretary of State's decision to reduce the rate support grant payable to certain local authorities is not a valid exercise of his discretion since he has a duty to act fairly to those authorities and is in breach of his duty if he refuses to meet their representatives before making his decision. In 1979 the Government decided to alter the system for the distribution of the rate support grant by substituting a single block grant under a Local Government, Planning and Land Bill. The Government told local authorities that the Bill would make transitional arrangements for 1980-81 which would foreshadow the principles of the new system so far as possible within the framework of the old. Under the transitional arrangements the Secretary of State would be given power to reduce the rate support grant payable to an authority under the Local Government Act 1974 where the authority's expenditure exceeded a prescribed limit. Some of them submitted budgets in excess of the prescribed limits. The Secretary of State considered representations, and on September 18, 1980, announced that when the transitional arrangements in the Bill were in force he would implement them against authorities which had exceeded the targets unless they made exceptional efforts to hold down their expenditure. Some authorities failed to comply by the date that the Bill became law on November 13, 1980. S.48 to s.50 which contained the transitional arrangements came into force immediately, but the Secretary of State could not enforce the reduction of the grant until a Multipliers Order was made calculating the amount of the reduction. On December 18, those local authorities in danger of grant reduction were told that the last day on which they could secure exemption was the day the order was approved which would probably be January 15, 1981. On December 19, 1980, the local authorities' association wrote asking to meet the Secretary of State to discuss the matter. He replied on January 9, 1981, saying that he did not believe the meeting would have any practical effect. On January 15, the order was approved. On January 26, the Secretary of State exercised his discretion under s.48 to s.50 to reduce the amount of grant payable to the applicants, six authorities which had not complied with the reductions. They applied for an order of certiorari to quash the decision. It was held that the Multipliers Order was valid and effective from January 15, 1981 because the formula set out in the Order disclosed the principles on which the Secretary of State had determined the multipliers to be applied in reducing the amount of the rate support grant to those authorities which had not curtailed their expenditure, and so complied with s.49(4) and s.50(2) of the Act. Further, the order was not unreasonable or capricious in its effect and the Secretary of State had not misdirected himself as to his powers, and his policy in the exercise of his powers was not unreasonable. However, his decision to reduce the grant was not a valid exercise of his discretion because having acquired duties under the Act he had a duty not to fetter his discretion and to act fairly to those authorities likely to be affected and he was in breach of those duties by refusing to meet the applicants' representatives to see whether they had any new suggestions to make about the policy he had formulated before he made his decision. Accordingly, his decision would be quashed (_[British Oxygen Co Ltd v Minister of Technology [1971] A.C. 610, [1970] 7 WLUK 75](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7B10B180E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f55e53fd990b40ee94c8504e6526930a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[McInnes v Onslow Fane [1978] 1 W.L.R. 1520, [1978] 4 WLUK 7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF5FDF650E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f55e53fd990b40ee94c8504e6526930a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, dictum of Templeman L.J. in _[Attorney General ex rel Tilley v Wandsworth LBC [1981] 1 W.L.R. 854, [1981] 2 WLUK 39](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69A0E320E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f55e53fd990b40ee94c8504e6526930a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Sagnata Investments Ltd v Norwich Corp [1971] 2 Q.B. 614, [1971] 5 WLUK 36](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9736D9B0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f55e53fd990b40ee94c8504e6526930a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).