### Abstract

The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board is a public body under a duty to act judicially and is therefore amenable to the jurisdiction of the High Court. The Board is constituted under prerogative powers for the purpose of making ex gratia payments to victims of crimes of violence. Under its constitutional scheme, compensation is to be assessed on the basis of common law damages subject to provisions 
(a) that a spouse and dependants of a victim may claim compensation and 
(b) that compensation is to be reduced by the amount of any payments from public funds accruing as a result of the injury or death to the benefit of the person to whom the award is made. 

The claimant, the widow of a police officer who died as a result of injuries inflicted by a suspect, applied to the Board for compensation for herself and her three children. The single member of the Board who heard her application awarded her GBP 300, having taken into account National Insurance benefits as a deduction. The widow, being dissatisfied, then made an application to three other members of the Board, as she was entitled to do under the scheme. They also took into account as a deduction a police pension and gratuity payable out of the police fund and reduced her award to nil as a result. The widow applied for an order of certiorari to quash the decision for error of law on the face of the record.

Held, dismissing the motion, 
(1) that since the Board was a public body under a duty to act judicially it was amenable to the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court by order of certiorari; 
(2) that, having regard to the constitutional scheme, the Board could not be said to have erred in law in deducting the National Insurance benefits and the pension and gratuity payable from the police fund, all of which were payments from public funds; and 
(3) that the application to three members of the Board after an application to a single member was not an appeal but a renewed application which could be decided de novo. ( _[R. v Electricity Commissioners Ex p. London Electricity Joint Committee Co (1920) Ltd [1924] 1 K.B. 171, [1923] 7 WLUK 128](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I42EB90D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=16377da35c794d199cf63b12cf83e8e9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ at p. 205 applied; _[Clifford, Re [1921] 2 A.C. 570, [1921] 7 WLUK 194](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I88AA4A90E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=16377da35c794d199cf63b12cf83e8e9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished; _[R. v RA Manchester Legal Aid Committee Ex p. Brand & Co [1952] 2 Q.B. 413, [1952] 2 WLUK 47](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I614138A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=16377da35c794d199cf63b12cf83e8e9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).