A and his wife, both Pakistani nationals, were domiciled in England where they were granted indefinite leave to remain. They desired to adopt a child, aged 5 1/2, born in Pakistan of a close relative. In 1981 A sought advice and was handed a letter issued by the Home Office which stated that there was no provision in the Immigration Rules for a child to be brought to the UK for adoption and that if a child was allowed to enter for such a purpose it would only be at the Home Secretary's discretion and in exceptional cases. The appellant commenced the necessary procedures along the lines indicated by the letter for such cases. Unfortunately, a further enquiry by the DHSS as to the appropriateness of an adoption order being made was not carried out owing to an administrative muddle and the entry application for the child was refused. Upon the hearing of A's application for judicial review the judge held that he was unable to find any ground that the Secretary of State had acted unfairly.

Held, allowing the appeal, that by sending the circular letter setting out the necessary criteria and procedure, the Secretary of State had effectively made his own rules and had stated those matters which he considered relevant in reaching his decision. The categories of unreasonableness were not closed and an unfair action would seldom be a reasonable one. Although the circumstances did not create an estoppel the Secretary of State had misdirected himself according to his own criteria and had acted unreasonably (_[Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 K.B. 223, [1947] 11 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I68410501E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76de4e049ae74438b6393b67eb02ecaf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[R. v Liverpool City Council Ex p. Liverpool Taxi Fleet Operators Association [1975] 1 W.L.R. 701, [1974] 12 WLUK 25](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I55D973B0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76de4e049ae74438b6393b67eb02ecaf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[O'Reilly v Mackman [1983] 2 A.C. 237, [1982] 11 WLUK 222](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I11E00610E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76de4e049ae74438b6393b67eb02ecaf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; _[Attorney General of Hong Kong v Ng Yuen Shiu [1983] 2 A.C. 629, [1983] 2 WLUK 197](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69BD1DB0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76de4e049ae74438b6393b67eb02ecaf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and _[R. v Entry Clearance Officer (Bombay) Ex p. Amin [1983] 2 A.C. 818, [1983] 7 WLUK 72](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I430EF750E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=76de4e049ae74438b6393b67eb02ecaf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).