### Summary

W was injured when a Serbian tank fired on a building in which he was stationed on a peacekeeping exercise. W appealed against the dismissal of his challenge to the refusal of MOD to pay him compensation because it was excluded as "military activity by warring factions" arguing that as an attack on UN personnel it was a criminal act. The court held that the attack was criminal military activity and MOD's decision was neither irrational or unreasonable and was within the terms of its stated policy.

### Abstract

W appealed against the dismissal ([1999] 1 W.L.R. 1209, [1999] C.L.Y. 257) of his appeal against the dismissal ([1998] C.O.D. 334, [1998] C.L.Y. 255) of his application for judicial review of the MoD's refusal to pay him compensation for injuries sustained while serving as a soldier in the UN peacekeeping force in Bosnia when a Serbian tank fired a single round into the building where W was stationed. In 1979, the MoD had introduced the Criminal Injuries Compensation (Overseas) Scheme to provide discretionary ex gratia compensation to members of the armed forces injured abroad by crimes of violence at levels similar to awards under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board scheme for victims of such crimes in Great Britain. In 1994 the Minister of State had said in a Parliamentary statement that compensation would not be awarded for injuries sustained as a result of "war operations or military activity by warring factions", and that that definition applied to the situation in Bosnia. W contended that the MoD had acted unlawfully, that his injuries were not excluded by the Scheme as a Serbian attack on a UN peacekeeping base amounted to an international crime, and that there had been unfairness as soldiers going to Bosnia had not been informed of the exclusion. W argued that compensation was paid to soldiers injured in peacekeeping duty in Northern Ireland and should be available to him.

Held, dismissing the appeal (Lord Hobhouse dissenting), that the scheme was rational in refusing to make "military activity" and criminal activity mutually exclusive so that there was no reason why the exclusion should not apply to W. Although the court had sympathy with W's position no legitimate expectation of his had been frustrated and the decision was not unfair.