Abstract
Lorries carrying livestock for export required police protection from animal rights protesters at the port of Shoreham in order to gain access to ITF's cross-Channel ferry service. After several months of high level policing for five days a week the Chief Constable decided to reduce police protection to two days a week as the drain on financial and manpower resources was interfering with policing of the county. Police officers turned back livestock vehicles on days when no cover was available where it was believed that a breach of the peace might otherwise occur. The Chief Constable successfully appealed ([1998] Q.B. 477, [1997] C.L.Y. 4174) against a decision allowing ITF's application for judicial review of his actions. ITF appealed, arguing that the Chief Constable had an overriding duty to make it possible for lawful activities to be carried out, or, if he had a discretion as to how to respond to the problem, his decision was one which no chief constable could reasonably have reached and, in any event, amounted to a quantitative restriction on exports contrary to the Treaty of Rome 1957 Art.34.
Held, dismissing the appeal, that 

(1) the right to trade lawfully was no more to be considered an absolute right than the right to protest. In circumstances where there were conflicting rights, the Chief Constable had to weigh a number of factors, including the likelihood of a serious breach of the peace and the resources available to him. Furthermore, there was no rule that the police could never restrain lawful activity in an effort to prevent a breach of the peace, and 

(2) it was doubtful whether the acts or omissions of the Chief Constable constituted "measures" for the purposes of Art.34, but, if they did, the wider requirements of public policy, such as the need to maintain public order, were, under Art.36, capable of providing justification for restrictions, provided the steps taken were proportionate. Limiting the number of days on which police cover would be provided was not disproportionate in the light of the resources available to the Chief Constable, given that he was also required to carry out all his other duties.