The Town Clerk of Liverpool Corporation had assured the Association that it would not increase the number of licensed taxis without hearing representations from the Association. The Court of Appeal held that it was unlawful for the Corporation to have departed from this undertaking.

---

Where an authority has given interested parties an undertaking that a certain administrative decision will not be altered for a certain period, then, while the undertaking may not in fact be enforceable, the court can interfere by prohibition to prevent the authority from acting on an alteration in the decision made without giving the interested parties an opportunity to make representations. The Liverpool council appointed a special committee to consider whether licences should be granted to taxi cabs in excess of the 300 which had been permitted thitherto. After hearing representations from the existing licensees the committee chairman undertook in public at a council meeting that the numbers would not be increased until legislation controlling private hire cars was in force. The Town Clerk confirmed that undertaking in a letter. A few months later, without any warning to the licensees, the council reversed its decision and resolved to issue another 50 licences almost at once, with subsequent further increases. The Divisional Court refused leave for prerogative orders without giving reasons.

Held, on appeal, that the council had a duty to act fairly which it had clearly not done. Prohibition would issue so that the council could reconsider the matter after all interested parties had had an opportunity to express their views. (_[Birkdale District Electric Supply Co Ltd v Southport Corp [1926] A.C. 355, [1926] 2 WLUK 38](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74C33AA0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=532d346f9e7f4f24aeabe65b8de7ec7f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished; _[Robertson v Minister of Pensions [1949] 1 K.B. 227, [1948] 10 WLUK 6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89028740E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=532d346f9e7f4f24aeabe65b8de7ec7f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[Lever (Finance) Ltd v Westminster Corp [1971] 1 Q.B. 222, [1970] 7 WLUK 111](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE04C1170E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=532d346f9e7f4f24aeabe65b8de7ec7f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).