 It was held that a series of procedural errors did not undermine the safety of a prosecution. Notably, a serious error had been remedied by the Crown and the defendant had not suffered unfairness.

 ---

 ### Summary

The Supreme Court clarified the effect of procedural errors on the validity of confiscation proceedings. A procedural error would not deprive the court of jurisdiction, but raised the possibility that it might be unfair to make the confiscation order.

### Abstract

The Crown appealed against a decision that procedural errors had deprived the court of jurisdiction to make a confiscation order against the respondent offender.

The respondent had been sentenced to imprisonment in July 2012 for supply of drugs and money laundering. The sentencing judge made orders forfeiting the drugs and depriving the respondent of various items used for the purposes of crime. She postponed the hearing of confiscation proceedings until November 2012. A hearing eventually took place in May 2014. The respondent asserted that two procedural errors had been made: (i) the CPS had failed to make an application to extend postponement as required by the [Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 s.14(8)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0283D50E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default)) and (ii) the judge had breached [s.15](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID4B8A5A0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default)) by making the forfeiture and deprivation orders before the confiscation hearing. The respondent asserted that the court therefore no longer had jurisdiction to proceed. The court disagreed and made a confiscation order. However, that order was quashed by the Court of Appeal, which concluded that there had been no jurisdiction to make it.

The respondent submitted that the confiscation proceedings were invalid and the Crown was unable to rely on [s.14(11)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0283D50E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default)), which excused procedural defects related to postponement, because of the terms of [s.14(12)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0283D50E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) Courts had been given express power to postpone confiscation hearings until after sentencing. Technical failures to observe the procedures had often been relied on to contend that the confiscation proceedings were invalid. The legislative response was the insertion of s.14(11) and s.14(12) into the 2002 Act. The manifest purpose of s.14(11) was to remove any supposed rule that a procedural failure connected with postponement invalidated the confiscation procedure and prevented an order being made. However, that subsection was qualified by subsection (12), which stated that s.14(11) would not apply if the court made an order falling within [s.13(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0707D3F0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default)), such as forfeiture orders, before the confiscation order. The instant case was one in which s.14(12) applied, because the judge had inadvertently infringed [s.15(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID4B8A5A0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default)) by making the forfeiture and deprivation orders before confiscation had been considered (see paras [8, 13-14](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) In _[R. v Soneji (Kamlesh Kumar) [2005] UKHL 49, [2006] 1 A.C. 340, [2005] 7 WLUK 669](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6A674AF0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Knights (Richard Michael) [2005] UKHL 50, [2006] 1 A.C. 368, [2005] 7 WLUK 671](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I516CF1D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b6f9027abca2452aa788db713175d6dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ the House of Lords recognised that it would defeat the purpose of the confiscation legislation if orders were treated as bad simply because there had been a failure to comply with the postponement provisions. Although the facts in those cases concerned postponements, and predated s.14(11), the reasoning was not confined to that kind of procedural defect. It followed from those decisions that, irrespective of s.14(11), the correct approach to failure to observe procedural provisions was to ask whether Parliament must have intended invalidity of any confiscation order to follow, Soneji and Knights followed (paras [16-17](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) In finding that the court had lacked jurisdiction to make the confiscation order, the Court of Appeal had given insufficient weight to the analysis contained in Soneji and Knights. That analysis held good. The court remained under a duty to make a confiscation order, and the question was whether that duty was removed by a procedural error which caused no injustice or unfairness to the defendant. The Court of Appeal had also treated the breach of s.14(8) as the critical matter which, once s.14(11) was unavailable because of the inadvertent making of the forfeiture orders, led to its view on the loss of jurisdiction. However, it was difficult to see a failure to apply for a further postponement as going to so fundamental a matter as jurisdiction. The correct analysis was that a failure to honour the statutory procedure raised the very real possibility that it would be unfair to make the order, although the jurisdiction to do so remained, and unless the court was satisfied that no substantial unfairness would ensue, an order should not be made. That did not deprive s.14(12) of effect; it remained effective to remove the peremptory bar of s.14(11) on quashing confiscation orders on grounds only of procedural defect connected with postponement. Where s.14(11) applied, no such defect alone could justify quashing. Where it did not apply, a procedural defect would make it wrong to make a confiscation order if unfairness would ensue which could not be cured. However, if the defect gave rise to no unfairness there could be no obstacle to the making of the order. That was what the court's duty under the 2002 Act required (paras [22-24, 31](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) Unfairness might ensue after a very long period of inactivity. Unfairness would be especially likely if the statutory permitted period of two years, within which confiscation should be dealt with, was exceeded without exceptional circumstances. However, no unfairness could be suggested in the respondent's case. The statutory permitted period of two years had not been exceeded, and there was no obstacle to the making of the confiscation order. The confiscation order was therefore restored (paras [32-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).