### Summary

Subordinate legislation that had been approved by affirmative resolution of both Houses of Parliament could be subject to judicial review on the grounds of illegality, procedural impropriety or Wednesbury unreasonableness. Accordingly, the Asylum (Designated Countries of Destination and Designated Safe Third Countries) Order 1996, whereby Pakistan was designated as a country where there was no serious risk of persecution, could be reviewed.

### Abstract

The Secretary of State appealed against a decision ([2001] EWHC Admin 7, Times, February 9, 2001) that he had erred in his inclusion and retention of Pakistan on the list of countries designated as appearing to him to be free from a serious risk of persecution and in his decision to accordingly certify J, a Pakistani asylum seeker, as subject to the expedited asylum procedure pursuant to the [Asylum and Immigration Appeals Act 1993 Sch.2 para.5(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D35B4E0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54741db81bb5444483d07d853cc44223&contextData=(sc.Search)). The designation of Pakistan had been made via the [Asylum (Designated Countries of Destination and Designated Safe Third Countries) Order 1996](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I757E9830E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54741db81bb5444483d07d853cc44223&contextData=(sc.Search)), which had been debated and approved by both Houses of Parliament. The judge had carried out an evaluation of the evidence that had been available to the Secretary of State and had concluded that the inclusion of Pakistan in the Order had been irrational. The issue arose as to whether, and on what grounds, the court was entitled to review the legality of subordinate legislation.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that (1) subordinate legislation that had been approved by affirmative resolution of both Houses of Parliament could be subject to judicial review on the grounds of illegality, procedural impropriety or Wednesbury unreasonableness. The extent of any review on the ground of rationality would be dependent on the nature and purpose of the empowering Act. It was apparent, in the instant case, that the Secretary of State's decision should not be subjected to over zealous scrutiny, and (2) having regard to evidence concerning the treatment of women and of the Ahmadis, a minority religious group, the Secretary of State had been irrational in his conclusion, _[Islam v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1999] 2 A.C. 629, [1999] 3 WLUK 491](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICAE4CA21E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=54741db81bb5444483d07d853cc44223&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered.