#key-case 

Lord Bridge's judgment:
> 'Some public comments on the decision of the European Court of Justice, affirming the jurisdiction of the courts of member states to override national legislation if necessary to enable interim relief to be granted in protection of rights under Community law, have suggested that this was a novel and dangerous invasion by a Community institution of the sovereignty of the United Kingdom Parliament. But such comments are based on a misconception. If the supremacy within the European Community of Community law over the national law of member states was not always inherent in the E.E.C. Treaty … it was certainly well established in the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice long before the United Kingdom joined the Community. Thus, whatever limitation of its sovereignty Parliament accepted when it enacted the European Communities Act 1972 was entirely voluntary.'
> 
> 'Under the terms of the Act of 1972 it has always been clear that it was the duty of a United Kingdom court, when delivering final judgment, to override any rule of national law found to be in conflict with any directly enforceable rule of Community law. Similarly, when decisions of the European Court of Justice have exposed areas of United Kingdom statute law which failed to implement Council directives, Parliament has always loyally accepted the obligation to make appropriate and prompt amendments. Thus there is nothing in any way novel in according supremacy to rules of Community law in those areas to which they apply and to insist that, in the protection of rights under Community law, national courts must not be inhibited by rules of national law from granting interim relief in appropriate cases is no more than a logical recognition of that supremacy.'


---


### Abstract

F and other owners of 95 fishing vessels (F and O) sought an interim injunction against the Secretary of State, (S), to prevent him from enforcing the [Merchant Shipping Act 1988 Part 2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I47369310E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9eeb3c8c1a4943ccb6060c32ffc28365&contextData=(sc.Default)) against them. The applicants were companies with Spanish interests who had previously enjoyed fishing rights entitling them to fish against UK quotas under the Common Fisheries Policy. Under the 1988 Act, which made registration of such rights compulsory, F and O were no longer eligible because of their Spanish connections ([s.14(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I47388EE1E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9eeb3c8c1a4943ccb6060c32ffc28365&contextData=(sc.Default))). F and O applied for judicial review to challenge the validity of certain provisions of the 1988 Act on the ground that they contravened European law. 

The House of Lords held that the Queen's Bench Division had exceeded its powers in granting interim relief against S, as there was no jurisdiction in existence to enable the making of such an order against the Crown. The House of Lords then referred a question to the European Court of Justice about the relative status of English and European law. The European Court ruled that in cases concerning community law, where the only barrier preventing a national court from granting interim relief was the existence of a national rule, then the national court must set aside that rule. The applicants returned to the House of Lords.

Held: Interim relief would be granted pending a final decision from the European Court as to the validity of the UK registration laws. The House of Lords set out their reasons for their decision of 9 July 1990 following F and O's application for interim relief. They applied the dual criteria of _[American Cyanamid Co v Ethicon Ltd [1975] A.C. 396, [1975] 2 WLUK 14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5D8166F1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9eeb3c8c1a4943ccb6060c32ffc28365&contextData=(sc.Default))_. The first criterion concerned the availability of an adequate remedy in damages to either party. If this test was not satisfied, the court proceeded to the second stage, which was to consider the balance of convenience in all the circumstances of the case. 

In the instant case, the balance of convenience should be interpreted broadly in order to take into account the interests of the general public, as served by S. To allow an interim injunction restraining the enforcement powers of a public authority, the court must be satisfied that the challenge to the law was prima facie of such strength as to merit such an action. Although there was evidence that permitting the applicants to fish would result in serious losses for the owners of other British fishing vessels, this did not outweigh the obvious and immediate damage that would continue to be caused to F and O if no interim relief were granted.