As part-time workers were predominantly female, the EOC argued that the statute indirectly discriminated against women contrary to EU law. The House of Lords agreed and granted a declaration to that effect. As a result, industrial tribunals in the UK subsequently ignored the wording of the Act and granted part-time workers compensation rights if they had completed two (rather than previously, five) years employment.

---

### Abstract

Statutory qualifying thresholds excluding part-time employees from compensation for unfair dismissal and redundancy payments are incompatible with Community law. The Equal Opportunities Commission requested the Secretary of State to reconsider statutory provisions excluding part-time employees from compensation for unfair dismissal and redundancy payments on the grounds that they discriminated against women, because considerably more women than men worked part-time, and were in conflict with Community law. 

The Secretary of State replied in a letter that the statutory thresholds were justifiable. The Commission applied for judicial review, and D, who had been employed part-time by a health authority until made redundant and who remained uncompensated due to the statutory thresholds, was joined as a party. The Divisional Court dismissed the application. An appeal to the Court of Appeal (Times, November 12, 1992) was dismissed

Held, that 

(1) dismissing D's appeal, assuming the statutory thresholds were in conflict with Community law, D's claim to redundancy pay should properly be brought against her employers in the industrial tribunal; 
(2) the Commission, by virtue of the [Sex Discrimination Act 1975 s.53(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6F4ACE91E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default)), had a sufficient interest in the proceedings to give it the necessary locus standi; 
(3) under [Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.52 r.1(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAB76F890E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default)) the Divisional Court had jurisdiction to declare that primary legislation was incompatible with Community law (_[R. v Secretary of State for Transport Ex p. Factortame Ltd (No.1) [1990] 2 A.C. 85, [1989] 5 WLUK 207](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6945FC70E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v Secretary of State for Transport Ex p. Factortame Ltd (No.2) [1991] 1 A.C. 603, [1990] 10 WLUK 139](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I694671A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v Secretary of State for Transport Ex p. Factortame Ltd (C-221/89) EU:C:1991:320, [1992] Q.B. 680, [1991] 7 WLUK 326](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6944C3F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied); and 
(4) allowing the Commission's appeal, the onus of showing that the threshold provisions were objectively justified and thus did not infringe Art.119 of the Treaty was on the Secretary of State. On the evidence before the Divisional Court this had not been so shown and, accordingly, declarations should be made that the provisions were incompatible with the Treaty of Rome 1957 Art.119 and the relevant Council directives (_[Bilka-Kaufhaus GmbH v Weber von Hartz (170/84) EU:C:1986:204, [1986] E.C.R. 1607, [1986] 5 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I748F3250E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Rinner-Kuhn v FWW Spezial-Gebaudereinigung GmbH & Co KG (171/88) EU:C:1989:328, [1989] E.C.R. 2743, [1989] 7 WLUK 194](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I884CA4C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=75038402f9d547aab915fc09ff806c2c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).