 In this case the Inland Revenue had accepted late ‘loss relief claims’ from Unilever on 30 occasions over a 20-year period. Then, without warning, the IRC refused to accept further late claims. The Court of Appeal held that, whilst there had not been an express promise or conscious practice by the IRC, there had been a clear and consistent pattern of conduct by the IRC upon which Unilever could rely.

 ---

The IRC appealed against a decision that U had made the necessary claims relating to corporation tax within the two year period specified. The case concerned tax charged on the profits of companies and the setting off of losses against those profits. [Taxes Management Act 1970 s.42](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFED60CB0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3d7df3af991b4ee29e30a052d45fc6c0&contextData=(sc.Default)) empowered the IRC to prescribe the form in which such a claim should be made. [Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 s.393(11)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFED48610E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3d7df3af991b4ee29e30a052d45fc6c0&contextData=(sc.Default)) provided that a claim must be made within two years from the end of the accounting period in which the loss incurred. Since the late 1960s the IRC and U had used an agreed procedure and schedule for the provisional and final assessment of company profits. The content of the schedule was altered by the IRC in 1987. Although the procedure was not completed within the two year period, there was no evidence that either party consciously disregarded the time limit. U argued that the IRC had abused their power and that their decision not to exercise discretion in U's favour was so unreasonable as to satisfy the public law test of irrationality.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that 

(1) U's claims were allowed in the past irrespective of whether they were on time or late; 

(2) the two year time limit was pointless on the facts of this case, formal compliance would have availed the IRC nothing. In fact the cooperative informal arrangement provided the IRC with more than the statutory provisions required, _[R. v Inland Revenue Commissioners Ex p. MFK Underwriting Agents Ltd [1990] 1 W.L.R. 1545, [1989] 7 WLUK 90](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D8BE710E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3d7df3af991b4ee29e30a052d45fc6c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Inland Revenue Commissioners Ex p. Matrix Securities Ltd [1994] 1 W.L.R. 334, [1994] 2 WLUK 243](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D8B98F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3d7df3af991b4ee29e30a052d45fc6c0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished. The decision of the IRC not to exercise discretion in favour of U to allow late claims was irrational.