### Summary

The statutory regime relating to the admission of the evidence of an absent witness at a criminal trial did not breach the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1FBD48E5924705BFBD5299078ED2BC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) . Convention jurisprudence did not require the regime to be disapplied in favour of a rule that convictions based solely or decisively on such evidence were incompatible with art.6.

### Abstract

The appellants (H) appealed against a decision ( _[R. v Horncastle (Michael Christopher) [2009] EWCA Crim 964, [2009] 4 All E.R. 183](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6E6FF6B04A6411DE99C8DC33311DA9AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default))_ ) that they had received fair trials and their convictions were safe.

H had been convicted after trials in which statements of witnesses who were not called to give evidence had been placed before the jury. In the first appeal, the witness had died but had made a statement before he died. In the second appeal, a witness had made a statement but had refused to attend trial because she was too frightened to give evidence. In each case, the statement was admitted pursuant to the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 s.116](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7F5144C0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) .

H, relying on the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in _[Al-Khawaja v United Kingdom (26766/05) (2009) 49 E.H.R.R. 1, [2009] 1 WLUK 266](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1D28FD80563311DEB061AE989825E1E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , argued that their convictions were based solely, or to a decisive extent, on statements of witnesses whom they had had no chance of cross-examining, and therefore infringed the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.6(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1FBD48E5924705BFBD5299078ED2BC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.6(3)(d)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE1FBD48E5924705BFBD5299078ED2BC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) .

### Held

Appeals dismissed.

The judgment of the ECtHR in Al-Khawaja was not to be treated as determinative of the success of the appeals. 

Although the requirement in the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B24CE80E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) to take into account the ECtHR jurisprudence normally resulted in the national courts applying principles clearly established by the ECtHR, there would be rare occasions, such as the instant case, when the Supreme Court would have concerns as to whether a decision of the ECtHR sufficiently appreciated particular aspects of domestic process. In such circumstances the SC could decline to follow the ECtHR decision, giving reasons for adopting that course. 

The common law had, by the hearsay rule, addressed the aspect of a fair trial that art.6(3)(d) was designed to ensure, long before the Convention came into force. The continental procedure had not addressed that aspect. Parliament had enacted exceptions to the hearsay rule that were required in the interests of justice, including the [Criminal Evidence Act 1965](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC4FEAC00956B11E2A062A25E269041DB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) , the [Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I601F6730E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) , and the 2003 Act. The exceptions were not subject to the "sole or decisive" rule, since the regime enacted by Parliament contained safeguards that rendered that rule unnecessary. In particular, the 2003 Act contained a code intended to ensure that hearsay evidence was only admitted when it was fair that it should be. Hearsay was not made generally admissible by the code, but it made provision for a limited number of categories of admissible hearsay, and in [s.124](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID71DDA40E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) , [s.125](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA1E4DE01E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) , and [s.126](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7524F4C0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default)) , established special stipulations to which hearsay evidence was subject. Article 6(3)(d) did not deal with the appropriate procedure where it was impossible to comply with art.6(3)(d). 

The ECtHR had recognised, prior to Al-Khawaja , that exceptions to art.6(3)(d) were required in the interests of justice, _[Grant v Queen, The [2006] UKPC 2, [2007] 1 A.C. 1, [2006] 1 WLUK 200](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB381B2D0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Doorson v Netherlands (1996) 22 E.H.R.R. 330, [1996] 3 WLUK 388](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9A0865B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. It had also recognised that the admissibility of evidence was primarily a matter for national law, and that the fairness of a trial had to be assessed on a case by case basis, _[Kostovski v Netherlands (A/166) (1990) 12 E.H.R.R. 434, [1989] 11 WLUK 255](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID54C8430E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6c3a8c77255d4e2c94d4bd88f490ed39&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.

The manner in which it had approved the exceptions had resulted in a jurisprudence that lacked clarity. The sole or decisive rule had been introduced into the ECtHR jurisprudence in Doorson without discussion of the principle underlying it or full consideration of whether there was justification for imposing the rule as an overriding principle applicable equally to the continental and common law systems. The sole or decisive rule would create severe practical difficulties if applied to English criminal procedure. It raised the question of what was meant by decisive: any item of probative evidence might make all the difference between conviction and acquittal. It would often be impossible for an appeal court or the ECtHR to decide whether a particular statement was the sole or decisive basis of conviction. 

Not treating a particular piece of evidence as decisive would be a hard enough duty for a professional judge to discharge; a direction to a jury that they could regard a witness statement as supporting but not decisive evidence would involve them in mental gymnastics that few could perform. In any event, although English law did not include the sole or decisive rule it would, in almost all cases, have reached the same result in those cases where the ECtHR had invoked it. 

Al-Khawaja did not establish that it was necessary to apply the sole or decisive rule in England and Wales, Al-Khawaja considered. It had applied the rule in reliance on the ECtHR case law, but that case law had developed without full consideration of the safeguards against an unfair trial that existed under the common law procedure. If the rule was applied rigorously it would in some cases result in the acquittal, or failure to prosecute, defendants where there was cogent evidence of their guilt. That would be to the detriment of victims. Accordingly, it would not be right to hold that the sole or decisive rule should have been applied rather than the 2003 Act interpreted in accordance with its natural meaning.