

The Gaming Board is not obliged to disclose sources or details of information or their reasons when refusing a certificate of consent. Two French nationals contracted to buy the controlling shares in Crock-ford's gaming club and later became joint managing directors. They applied to the Gaming Board for a certificate of consent to entitle them to apply for a licence for the premises. At an interview with the Board they were asked and answered questions based on information already in the Board's possession, though its source and content were not disclosed to the applicants. The Board refused the certificate. The Board later declined to state which matters still troubled it or to give their reasons for refusal. The applicants moved the Court of Appeal for orders of certiorari to quash the Board's decision and mandamus to require the Board to give them sufficient information to answer any case against them. At the hearing the Board stated that the applicants were given the best possible outline of matters troubling the Board but that the sources and content of confidential information were not disclosed where this was inconsistent with their statutory duty and the public interest.

Held, dismissing the motion (1) that the Board had to act fairly by giving an applicant indication of the objections against him to enable him to answer them; (2) that the Board had done so in this case; and (3) that the Board was not obliged to disclose sources or details of its information to an applicant who was not being required to meet charges but only to satisfy the Board as to his fitness to apply for a licence. (Dicta of Lord Parker,C.J. in _[HK (An Infant), Re [1967] 2 Q.B. 617, [1966] 12 WLUK 27](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC0C14501E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=35a40ce01363447bb93a648efb7d0ccf&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).