MFK applied for judicial review of the Commissioner's decision that indexation uplift of bonds purchased by them and other Lloyd's underwriters as investments held in trust funds for the potential benefit of their syndicates was taxable as income. MFK and others had approached the Revenue on an informal basis to ascertain that the indexation uplift would be treated as a capital gain and not as income. The CGT rate was lower than the income tax rate and it was therefore beneficial to the underwriters to purchase bonds which on sale or redemption would be assessable to CGT and not income tax. MFK contended that the assurances given by the Revenue acted as an inducement to buy the bonds. Also, as the Revenue had made known its policy on tax treatment of the bonds it was an abuse of power to change its position which had a prejudicial effect on MFK. The Revenue had not taken action against parties with whom their policy had been formally acknowledged.

Held: Application refused. It was within the Revenue's managerial discretion to make statements to facilitate the collection of the public revenue. The taxpayer had a legitimate expectation that he would pay tax in line with statutory provisions. If the Revenue issued a formal statement the taxpayer could assume that it was binding where directly applicable. However in circumstances which were less formal the facts and circumstances of the case had to be investigated if the taxpayer was making an inquiry of the Revenue to find out if tax was payable on a certain transaction. The taxpayer had to submit all the facts to the Revenue and indicate the nature of the ruling required and the purposes for which it was required.