H and other Category C prisoners at Risley Prison appealed against the dismissal of their application for judicial review of a decision by S to amend the rules relating to eligibility for home leave in the interests of public safety and to restore public confidence in the administration of justice. At the time H commenced his sentence, the Notice to Prisoners issued to him provided that prisoners could apply for home leave after serving one third of their sentences. However, under the [Prison (Amendment) Rules 1995](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I774108B0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f2e1d9331ff2422084e6b5fcaeb74e94&contextData=(sc.Default)) , which implemented the changes, prisoners could not apply until they had served one half of their sentences. H contended that the Notice and inmate compact signed by prisoners at the start of their sentences created a legitimate expectation that home leave could be applied for after the shorter period had elapsed.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that, in the case of convicted prisoners, legitimate expectation, at its highest, merely required that each case was to be examined individually in light of whatever policy S saw fit to impose, _[Findlay, Re [1985] A.C. 318, [1984] 11 WLUK 136](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA6B8D740E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f2e1d9331ff2422084e6b5fcaeb74e94&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Where issues of substance, as opposed to procedure, were involved, the matter was to be resolved using Wednesbury principles and there was no requirement for a balancing exercise based on fairness or proportionality to be conducted, _[R. v Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Ex p. Hamble (Offshore) Fisheries Ltd [1995] 2 All E.R. 714, [1994] 11 WLUK 56](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5A5BEE90E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f2e1d9331ff2422084e6b5fcaeb74e94&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled to the extent that it required a court to conduct such an exercise. The policy change did not amount to a breach of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f2e1d9331ff2422084e6b5fcaeb74e94&contextData=(sc.Default)) , as the interference with a convicted prisoner's family life had already occurred with the imposition of a lawful sentence, and the existence of prison visits ensured that H was not totally cut off from his family. The Notice to Prisoners and the compact, read together, did not form a proper foundation for the legitimate expectation for which H contended, but it was unsatisfactory that the documents did not state clearly and unambiguously that eligibility for home leave and other privileges was subject to the regime in force at the time the application was made.