### Summary

Neither the [Bill of Rights 1688 art.9](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I61421541E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default)) nor the exclusive cognisance of the House of Commons posed any bar to the jurisdiction of the Crown Court to try Members of Parliament on charges of false accounting arising from claims for parliamentary expenses.

### Abstract

The appellant former Members of Parliament (C) appealed against a decision (_[[2010] EWCA Crim 1910, [2010] 2 Cr. App. R. 34](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEAB0E2909C2811DFA397CE34F86107C9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that prosecutions for false accounting relating to claims for parliamentary expenses were not precluded by parliamentary privilege.

C had been charged with false accounting contrary to the [Theft Act 1968 s.17(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF7843B0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default)) relating to claims for parliamentary expenses made when they were serving MPs. At a preparatory hearing, the Crown Court held that parliamentary privilege, derived from either the exclusive cognisance of Parliament or from the [Bill of Rights 1688 art.9](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I61421541E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default)), did not prevent it trying the claims. The Court of Appeal upheld that decision.

### Held

Appeals dismissed.

(1) The jurisprudence relating to art.9 was sparse and did not bear directly on the facts of the instant appeals. It did, however, support the proposition that art.9 was principally directed at freedom of speech and debate in the Houses of Parliament and in parliamentary committees, _[Bradlaugh v Gossett (1884) 12 Q.B.D. 271, [1884] 2 WLUK 27](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79A847E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Pepper (Inspector of Taxes) v Hart [1993] A.C. 593, [1992] 11 WLUK 389](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DC86CB0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Prebble v Television New Zealand Ltd [1995] 1 A.C. 321, [1994] 6 WLUK 319](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I28759431E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Attorney General of Ceylon v De Livera [1963] A.C. 103, [1962] 11 WLUK 18](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69B666F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Wason, Ex p. (1868-69) L.R. 4 Q.B. 573, [1869] 6 WLUK 48](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF088E8A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _R. v Greenway (Harry) unreported_and _[Buchanan v Jennings [2004] UKPC 36, [2005] 1 A.C. 115, [2004] 7 WLUK 372](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7CF3C960E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. That was where the essential business of Parliament took place. 

In considering whether actions outside the Houses and committees fell within parliamentary proceedings because of their connection to them, it was necessary to consider the nature of that connection and whether, if such actions did not enjoy privilege, that was likely to impact adversely on the essential business of Parliament. On that approach, the submission of claim forms for allowances and expenses did not qualify for the protection of privilege. Scrutiny of claims by the courts would have no adverse impact on the essential business of Parliament; it would not inhibit debate or freedom of speech or indeed any of MPs' various activities affecting their parliamentary duties. 

Similarly, expressions of parliamentary views of the ambit of art.9 did not support the suggestion that submitting such claims constituted parliamentary proceedings for art.9 purposes. There were good policy reasons for giving art.9 a narrow ambit: its effect where it applied was to prevent those injured by civil wrongdoing from obtaining redress and to prevent the prosecution of MPs for criminal conduct. Submitting allowances and expenses claims was not part of or incidental to the core or essential business of Parliament. It was an incident of the administration of Parliament and not part of the proceedings in Parliament (see paras [47-48, 59, 61-62](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) "Exclusive cognisance" described areas where the courts had ruled that issues should be resolved by Parliament rather than determined judicially. Parliament had never challenged, in general, the application of criminal law within its precincts and had accepted that the mere fact that a crime had been committed there was no bar to the jurisdiction of the criminal courts. Where a crime was committed within the House of Commons, that might also constitute a contempt of Parliament. 

The courts and Parliament had different, overlapping, jurisdictions: the House did not assert an exclusive jurisdiction to deal with criminal conduct, even where that related to or interfered with proceedings in committee or in the House. Where considered appropriate, the police would be invited to intervene with a view to prosecution in the courts; furthermore, criminal proceedings were unlikely to be possible without the co-operation of Parliament. Parliament had by legislative and administrative changes relinquished any claim to exclusive cognisance of its administrative business. Administrative decisions were taken by parliamentary committees: those decisions were protected from attack in the courts. However, there was a distinction between such decisions and their implementation; the latter was not subject to privilege. 

Where the House became aware that criminal offences might have been committed by an MP in relation to the administration of its business in circumstances that fell outside the absolute privilege conferred by art.9, it should be able to refer the matter to the police for consideration of criminal proceedings, or co-operate with the police in an inquiry, and it had done that in the instant cases. The House had not asserted exclusive cognisance in respect of expenses claims. Even if the House had not co-operated with the prosecuting authorities in the instant cases, the court would not have been prevented from exercising jurisdiction on the ground of exclusive cognisance. There was no bar to the Crown Court considering whether C's claims were fraudulent (paras [80-83, 89-92](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs"); see also paras [104-109, 117-119, 122-123](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) (Per Lord Clarke) Parliament appeared to have waived any right it might have had to claim the privilege of exclusive cognisance. Having done so, it could not later assert the exclusive cognisance relied upon and it was not open to the appellants as individuals to do so. In so far as it had been stated in _[Wellesley v Duke of Beaufort 39 E.R. 538, [1831] 7 WLUK 91](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID1B85B40E57711DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7df964c1cb8948ee900518260a369ef1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that an MP could rely on that privilege despite Parliament waiving it, that statement was not accepted, Wellesley considered (paras [132-134](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs"))