A substantive legitimate expectation was created when several severely disabled patients were promised by the Health Authority that they would be able to live at a purpose-built residential facility for as long as they chose.

---

In the case the applicant had been left severely disabled after a car accident. She had moved to Mardon House, a purpose-built facility for young, long-term, severely disabled residential patients in 1993 with a number of residents from a hospital, after they had been promised that they would be able to live there for as long as they chose. By 1998, however, only three patients remained at Mardon House, and the health authority decided to close it for financial reasons.

The Court of Appeal held that the decision was unlawful. Coughlan had been clearly promised a home for life at Mardon House. The health authority had not treated its promise to provide a home as distinct from its duty to provide care or funding for care. It had not even sought to offer the applicant a reasonably equivalent facility to replace what was promised to her. It was unfair for the health authority to have resiled from its promise in these circumstances – this amounted to an abuse of power.

---

C, a tetraplegic, was moved from a hospital which was closing to Mardon House, MH, a purpose built property owned by NEDHA, which provided facilities for the severely disabled. C, who had been told that MH would be a permanent home for her, successfully applied for judicial review ((1999) 47 B.M.L.R. 27, [1999] 1 C.L. 250) of a decision of NEDHA to close MH on the basis that (1) her nursing care had to be provided free by the NHS and could not be provided by the local authority on a means tested basis where appropriate, and (2) NEDHA was in breach of its promise by closing MH. NEDHA appealed.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that 

(1) in certain cases nursing care could fall outside a health authority's statutory duty and be provided by social services, to be paid for by the patient on a means tested basis. However, in the instant case, the nature of C's disabilities meant that her care fell outside the scope of care provided by social services, and NEDHA was in breach of its statutory duty by its decision to close MH. The distinction between nursing care which could be provided by social services and that which was the responsibility of a health authority was not an easy one to draw, but guidance could be found in the [National Health Service Act 1977 s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA0AE1640E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default)) and s.3 and the [National Assistance Act 1948 s.21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5344D891E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default)), which stated that nursing care provided in conjunction with accommodation by social services could be regarded as part of a social services care package. However, it was necessary to examine the needs of the individual concerned in order to establish whether the type of nursing care required could be part of such a package. Care which was merely incidental to the accommodation provided by social services, and which was within the range of care which it could be expected to provide, would fall within the package. If that was the case, it was open to the Secretary of State under the statutory scheme to decline the provision of nursing care under the NHS, although he could not decline solely because social services would have to accept the costs. The option to decline had to be exercised in compliance with his general duty, under s.1 of the 1977 Act, to promote a free comprehensive health service. By deciding that C's needs could be met by social services rather than NEDHA in the instant case, the Secretary of State had gone beyond the terms of s.21 of the 1948 Act, which set out the classes of persons who were in need of care and attention that could be provided by social services, and 

(2) furthermore, with regard to the impending [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default)), the closure of MH was in breach of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default)) and also of a legitimate expectation brought about by NEDHA's own promise, _[R. v Inland Revenue Commissioners Ex p. Preston [1985] A.C. 835, [1985] 4 WLUK 185](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D8D46A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Secretary of State for the Environment Ex p. Nottinghamshire CC [1986] A.C. 240, [1985] 12 WLUK 143](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6557D250E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Hargreaves [1997] 1 W.L.R. 906, [1996] 11 WLUK 307](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65810531E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ae6fb4ed8542f3a64301a59e357236&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished. The closure decision was unfair and could not be justified by an overriding public interest.