#key-case 

This case concerned inaccurate evidence about the findings of a medical examination given to the CICB by a policewoman. The medical examination was to determine whether A had suffered the injuries that she claimed as a result of rape. The policewoman's testimony was that the examination suggested that A's claims were probably false, whereas the report of the examination, which was not seen by the Board, was in fact consistent with the injuries that A claimed to have suffered. Although the House of Lords recognised that a mistake of fact could form the basis for a judicial review claim, they in fact decided the case on the alternative basis of a breach of the rules of natural justice (or unfairness), so the comments made were obiter only.

---

A's claim for compensation in respect of alleged assault, rape and buggery, said to have occurred during a burglary at her house by two men, was refused by the CICB. A successfully applied for leave to apply out of time for judicial review of the CICB's decision, but the judge refused her relief on her substantive application. The judge, while finding that there had not been hardship, prejudice or detriment to good administration for the purposes of the [Supreme Court Act 1981 s.31(6)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C55BFB0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3ca4ff61d0d846129354786d6747f7b2&contextData=(sc.Default)), concluded that it was open to him to reopen the issue of A's delay in bringing the application on the ground that no good reason for extending time had been established for the purposes of the [Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.53 r.4(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAB7F0EE0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3ca4ff61d0d846129354786d6747f7b2&contextData=(sc.Default)) and he decided not to extend time. A's appeal against that ruling was dismissed ([1998] Q.B. 659, [1997] C.L.Y. 61) and she appealed. The CICB had stated that, on the evidence, A had failed to discharge the burden on her to prove that she was a victim of a crime of violence. A police officer who had taken A to see a police doctor had given evidence that the injury to A's rectum was the result of haemorrhoids, but a report by the police doctor, which was not before the CICB, stated that A's injuries were consistent with the allegation of buggery.

Held, allowing the appeal, that, where leave to apply for judicial review was granted ex parte, in the absence of an application to set it aside, which was not to be encouraged, the issue of delay could not be re-examined at the substantive hearing on the basis that there was no ground for extending time under Ord.53 r.4(1): there was no "application for leave to apply for judicial review" at the substantive hearing. It also seemed that there was no power to refuse leave on the basis of hardship for the same reason. What the court was entitled to do under s.31(6) was to refuse relief, _[R. v General Commissioners of Income Tax for Tavistock Ex p. Worth [1985] S.T.C. 564, [1985] 1 WLUK 484](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89E60110E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3ca4ff61d0d846129354786d6747f7b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled. Although the CICB was correct to place the onus on A, it was clear that, on an issue of vital importance, the CICB had proceeded on the basis of wrong evidence and facts. While neither the CICB nor the police had a duty to take steps to seek out evidence, the CICB was dependent on the cooperation of the police and it was not sufficient in the instant case for the police officer to have given oral evidence without inquiries having been made as to the existence of a doctor's report. The CICB's decision would be quashed on the ground that there had been unfairness and a breach of natural justice.