The Inland Revenue Commissioners are amenable to the process of judicial review. In 1978 P was informed that there would be no further inquiries into his tax affairs if he withdrew certain claims for interest relief and capital loss. P withdrew the claims and paid tax on a transaction about which inquiries had been made. In 1979 following receipt of new information relating to the same transaction, the IRC concluded that P had received a tax advantage from the transaction to which the Income and Corp Taxes Act 1970 s.460 applied and in July 1982 issued P with a request for further information. Thereafter P was given formal notice for the cancellation of a tax advantage. P sought judicial review of the notification and was successful. The Court of Appeal allowed the IRC's appeal.

Held, dismissing P's appeal, that a taxpayer could challenge a decision taken by the IRC in exercising their statutory powers and duties if he could show that they had failed to discharge their statutory duty towards him or that they had abused their powers or acted ultra vires, unfairness in the purported exercise of power could amount to an abuse or excess of power if the IRC were guilty of conduct equivalent to a breach of contract or breach of representation; here P had failed to discharge the burden placed on him. _[R. v Inland Revenue Commissioners Ex p. National Federation of Self Employed and Small Businesses Ltd [1982] A.C. 617, [1981] 4 WLUK 105](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D8C8350E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=115956cd07e043d698029ef30006828f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[HTV v Price Commission [1976] I.C.R. 170, [1976] 5 WLUK 31](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC43F9650E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=115956cd07e043d698029ef30006828f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).