The Home Secretary (as he was then entitled to do) set their minimum tariff sentences. However, he set these at 15 years each, which was five years longer than the recommendations made by the Lord Chief Justice and longer still than those made by the trial judge.

On review by the law lords, the tariffs were quashed. It was found that the Home Secretary, in acting in a quasi-judicial capacity, had taken into account irrelevant factors which should not have influenced his decision. These included emotive public protestations about the tariff levels, notably a vociferous tabloid newspaper campaign. This ‘public clamour’ about the individual case should have been distinguished from legitimate public concern about the level of crime in society in general, which was a relevant factor.

Additionally, the Home Secretary had failed to take into account the relevant factor of the welfare of the sentenced children. He had effectively sentenced them as if they were adults rather than boys barely over the age of any criminal responsibility

---

### Abstract

The Secretary of State appealed against a Court of Appeal ruling dismissing his appeal against an earlier ruling that his decision to fix a tariff period of 15 years for the detention at Her Majesty's pleasure of V and T following their conviction for murder at the age of 10 was unlawful. In reaching that conclusion he had applied the same principles applicable to adult offenders and taken into account the public's concern about the case, as evidenced by petitions and letters supporting a period of detention for life. V and T cross-appealed.

Held, allowing the cross-appeals and dismissing the appeal (Lord Goff and Lord Lloyd dissenting), that a term of detention at Her Majesty's pleasure passed under the [Children and Young Persons Act 1933 s.53(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I40F09DA0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5c90578500a409d80ac8a1bb319237d&contextData=(sc.Default)) was not to be equated with a sentence of mandatory life imprisonment passed on an adult offender and different considerations applied. In fixing the tariff period the Secretary of State could only have regard to circumstances existing at the time the offence was committed and not events which occurred subsequently. He had been given powers analogous to those of a sentencing judge and was subject to the same constraints. It therefore followed that petitions by the public and public opinion expressed by the media were irrelevant. The Secretary of State had a duty to consider at intervals whether continued detention was justified and to take into account the children's welfare and the possibility of their reintegration into society, depending upon their progress during detention. As the [Criminal Justice Act 1991](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FE6CB01E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a5c90578500a409d80ac8a1bb319237d&contextData=(sc.Default)) had not altered the position, the policy applied by the Secretary of State was unlawful.