Where it is alleged that a person is an illegal entrant the court has a duty to enquire into the evidence to ascertain whether it is sufficient to justify the belief of the immigration officer. The burden of proof in such cases is on the immigration authorities, but the standard is that of the balance of probabilities; further, there is no duty of candour on a prospective immigrant, although silence in the face of questions may amount to fraud on his part. 

Per curiam: the decision on these appeals should not be taken as authorising immigrants to demand the attendance for cross-examination of those who swore affidavits. Between K1 being interviewed by the clearing officer and the grant of any entry certificate in his favour he had, unknown to the immigration authorities, married. Subsequent to his admission to the UK his wife applied for leave to enter and the true situation came to light. He was detained as an illegal entrant. K2 was a national of Pakistan who went through a ceremony of marriage with B who was already married. On K2's arrival in this country he told a false story to the immigration officer, and was allowed to enter.

Held, allowing the appeal of K1 and dismissing that of K2, that 

(1) the phrase "illegal entrant" extended to any person who had entered the UK by means of some fraud or deception; 

(2) where a person alleges that he has been wrongfully detained as an illegal entrant the duty of the court is to enquire as to whether the evidence before the immigration officer justifies his detention, and is not limited to making enquiry as to whether there is some evidence for his view; 

(3) on such an enquiry the immigration authorities must prove on a balance of probabilities that the true facts were as believed by the immigration officer; and 

(4) when considering the conduct of any immigrant, there was no positive duty of candour, such as would apply to a contract of insurance, upon him ( _[Zamir v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1980] A.C. 930, [1980] 7 WLUK 215](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I12083210E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1b241e99f9494c0bbe8c591c6c33a77f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ disapproved and not followed; _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Khan [1977] 1 W.L.R. 1466, [1977] 5 WLUK 139](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6589B7C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1b241e99f9494c0bbe8c591c6c33a77f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ doubted; _[Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 K.B. 223, [1947] 11 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I68410501E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1b241e99f9494c0bbe8c591c6c33a77f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ not applied).