The court held that three applicants were refused gender reassignment surgery on the basis of an overly rigid application of policy by the health authority, which had not considered the applicant’s individual circumstances.

---

A applied for judicial review of NWLHA's decision not to fund gender reassignment surgery. At first instance, it was held that NWLHA had unlawfully fettered its discretion in meeting the obligation to provide treatment by failing to consider pertinent issues, including the most appropriate and effective treatment for the underlying illness. NWLHA appealed.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that although a policy to accord cases of transsexualism lower priority and refuse treatment save in exceptional cases was not irrational per se, such a policy must still have genuine regard for individual clinical needs and recognise the possibility of exceptional cases. Whilst NWLHA had accepted transsexualism as an illness, the policy formulated to deal with the obligation to treat reflected the belief of NWLHA's consultant in public health medicine that transsexualism merited psychiatric intervention only. The policy did not reflect the clinical judgment upon which it was said to be based, namely that transsexualism was an illness. The exceptions included within the policy were effectively a nullity and had no impact upon the application of the policy, which amounted to a total ban on all such treatment. If a policy was formulated which contained exceptions for overriding clinical need, then it was absurd if there were no situations in which that exception had any effect because the NWLHA's medical judgment was such that there was no effective treatment for transsexualism for which an overriding clinical need could exist. NWLHA's actions did not amount to the genuine application of a policy subject in all cases to individual assessment with due recognition of exceptional circumstances capable of constituting an overriding clinical need, _[Findlay, Re [1985] A.C. 318, [1984] 11 WLUK 136](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA6B8D740E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=050d5d848a704b2d93bff04e1caf4292&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.