Ratio: Lord Hoffmann said that Parliament could legislate contrary to human rights (thereby exercising its sovereignty) but only if it did so using the clearest possible language.

---

### Abstract

S, a convicted murderer serving a life sentence, continued to maintain his innocence and sought assistance from a journalist to investigate his case. S received several visits from a journalist during which they discussed a potential appeal. 

The Secretary of State then introduced a blanket requirement that journalists sign an undertaking confirming that none of the information obtained in oral interview would be used in a professional capacity. The journalist visiting S refused to comply and the visits ceased. S successfully applied for judicial review of the decision to require an undertaking ([1997] E.M.L.R. 261, [1998] C.L.Y. 4084) but the decision was reversed on appeal ([1999] Q.B. 349, [1997] C.L.Y. 2782). The Secretary of State contended that Prison Service Standing Order 5 of 1996 para.37 and para.37A, made under the [Prison Rules 1964 r.33](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9DCD32E0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ffb9cc089d8a4a26bf41d142d023c770&contextData=(sc.Search)) , permitted a complete ban on interviews by journalists with discretion being exercised to permit such interviews only in certain exceptional circumstances, such as where a prisoner was illiterate and that unrestricted interviews would adversely affect prison discipline. S appealed to the House of Lords.

Held, allowing the appeal, that free speech was not absolute and a prisoner could attempt to raise issues for general debate with journalists. In the instant case, however, the free speech at issue was very specific and valuable in nature. S was incarcerated because he was assumed to have been properly convicted but he wished to challenge that conviction and it was difficult to foresee a situation in which free speech could possibly be of greater importance. Although a prisoner could raise such issues via correspondence, the reality of the situation was that without a face to face interview, the likelihood of a journalist taking up a case was minimal. 

Until the blanket ban was imposed interviews had taken place with a number of prisoners and the evidence obtained as a result of investigations subsequently undertaken had led to the identification of miscarriages of justice. The current policy and decisions taken as a result were ultra vires as they curtailed S's fundamental rights. However, the rules had to be interpreted applying the principle of legality (Cross, Statutory Interpretation (3rd Ed., 1995) at p.165), which showed that the rules in themselves were not inherently unlawful as they did not affect fundamental and basic rights, but the imposition of a blanket ban was ultra vires.