 The applicants were discharged from the armed forces on the basis of their sexuality, in accordance with Ministry of Defence ("MOD") policy at that time. Although the MOD argued that the matter was non-justiciable (see Lord Roskill’s obiter speech in **_GCHQ_**), the court reviewed the issue with a relatively intense degree of scrutiny. It justified its approach by distinguishing between cases concerning high military policy (national security; military operations) and those, as in this case, concerning membership of the armed forces and the rights of those serving. Notwithstanding, the applicants were unsuccessful in their domestic challenge. A key factor in the court’s decision was that the policy had been debated and was then supported by a significant body of opinion in Parliament. The MOD’s policy position could not, therefore, be considered outside the range of reasonable responses on the issue in question, in terms of the _Wednesbury_ test.

 ---
 
 Smith and three others had been summarily dismissed from the armed services for no other reason than their sexuality. They claimed that the decision to do so was unreasonable/ irrational. 
 
 In the Court of Appeal, Sir Thomas Bingham MR acknowledged the well-trodden competence concerns but clearly considered that the court had a role to play in a matter that had a profound effect on the livelihood and employment rights of the four individuals who had been dismissed.
 
 The presence of competing interests is clearly seen here in Bingham’s speech:

> ‘The present cases … concern innate qualities of a very personal kind, and the decisions of which the appellants complain have had a profound effect on their careers and prospects. The appellants' rights as human beings are very much in issue. It is now accepted that this issue is justiciable. This does not of course mean that the court is thrust into the position of the primary decision-maker. It is not the constitutional role of the court to regulate the conditions of service in the armed forces of the Crown, nor has it the expertise to do so. But it has the constitutional role and duty of ensuring that the rights of citizens are not abused by the unlawful exercise of executive power. While the court must properly defer to the expertise of responsible decision-makers, it must not shrink from its fundamental duty to "do right to all manner of people…"