### Abstract

The court has jurisdiction to review the General Council of the Bar's decision not to act on a head of chambers' report on a barrister within his chambers for professional misconduct. The head of chambers has locus standi to challenge the decision. In December 1987, P, a former Solicitor-General and a Queen's Counsel in active practice, and head of chambers, reported another member of his chambers, also a practising Queen's Counsel, to the General Council of the Bar. He made allegations of dishonesty against the barrister and accused him of engaging in conduct which might have brought the profession of barrister into disrepute by failing to observe the ethics and etiquette of the profession when dealing with certain of chambers' finances, contrary to para.6 of the Code of Conduct for the Bar of England and Wales. Among the functions of the Professional Conduct Committee of the General Council of the Bar was the duty to prefer and prosecute disciplinary charges against members of the Bar before a disciplinary tribunal. The committee decided not to prefer charges of professional misconduct but preferred the lesser charge of breach of proper professional standards. P objected to the lesser charge being preferred and applied for judicial review, a declaration that the Professional Conduct Committee was obliged to prefer charges of professional misconduct against the barrister before a disciplinary tribunal, and an order that the committee prefer such charges.

Held, that 

(1) the General Council of the Bar was fulfilling the role of a prosecutor exercising discretion in the sifting and assessing of complaints and was empowered by its rules to prosecute a complaint before a disciplinary tribunal as an adjudicating body exercising powers delegated by the judges. The Professional Conduct Committee to whom these functions were delegated had to carry them out in accordance with its own rules; and, accordingly, it was amenable to the supervisory jurisdiction of the Divisional Court exercised by way of judicial review, _[R. v Benchers of Gray's Inn 99 E.R. 227, [1780] 4 WLUK 6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA56D4D80E57111DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6e8e56accda54128ad71d8fe2becc111&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Lincoln v Daniels [1962] 1 Q.B. 237, [1961] 7 WLUK 61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0F45F61E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6e8e56accda54128ad71d8fe2becc111&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered; 

(2) a disappointed complainant had locus standi to challenge a decision of a prosecuting authority not to proceed with the investigation of a complaint or the initiation of a prosecution, all the more so where the complainant was head of chambers with an interest to ensure that proper professional standards should be observed and any lapse investigated. Although the discretion of a prosecuting authority was broad, it was subject to review. It was not appropriate to define strictly the limits of such review, but each case had to be considered on the issues of irrationality or procedural irregularity, with due regard to the powers, functions and procedures of the body concerned, and the manner in which it dealt with the complaint or application in issue. P's complaint should not fail merely because he could not demonstrate that it had been excluded by the adoption of an illegitimate prior policy; and that the considerations of public policy did not inhibit the court from exercising its jurisdiction, _[R. v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis Ex p. Blackburn (No.1) [1968] 2 Q.B. 118, [1968] 1 WLUK 660](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3E0969C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6e8e56accda54128ad71d8fe2becc111&contextData=(sc.Default))_, R. v Race Relations Board Ex p. Selvarajan [1975] C.L.Y. 25 and _[R. v Police Complaints Board Ex p. Madden [1983] 1 W.L.R. 447, [1982] 12 WLUK 210](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60BEE940E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6e8e56accda54128ad71d8fe2becc111&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and 

(3) notwithstanding the delay in reaching a final resolution of their task the Professional Conduct Committee had acted within its discretion with impartiality and fairness; and, accordingly, its decision was not open to challenge.