### Abstract

D applied for leave to apply for judicial review of conditional planning permission given by SCC allowing ARC to extend its limestone operations at Whatley Quarry in Somerset. ARC's original application for permission to extend their operation was refused by the Secretary of State in May 1994. This refusal was subsequently quashed and in October 1995 SCC's Environment Committee resolved to grant planning permission subject to the satisfactory prior completion of agreements under the [Town and Country Planning Act 1990 s.106](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I750B6EC0E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ff1efe1de24085ade77d4710756c92&contextData=(sc.Default)) on nine specific topics. In July 1996 the Committee granted the conditional planning permission, being satisfied with the nine agreements. D wished to argue that; 

(1) in granting the conditional planning permission SCC had failed to have sufficient regard to the Secretary of State's earlier decision letter and his policy guidance set out in the Circular 16/91 as attention was not drawn to the documents in the officer's report, and 

(2) the nine agreements entered into fell outside s.106 of the 1990 Act and did not contain the planning obligations capable of satisfaction. SCC argued that D had no "sufficient interest" within the meaning of the [Supreme Court Act 1981 s.31(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C55BFB0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ff1efe1de24085ade77d4710756c92&contextData=(sc.Default)) and RSC Ord.53 r.3(7) as he was not a landowner and had no personal right or interest threatened by the proposed mining.

Held, refusing the application, that 

(1) in an application for leave for judicial review, where there was an arguable case, the court when considering locus standi had to ensure that the applicant was not prompted by an ill motive, was a busybody or a trouble maker, _[R. v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Ex p. World Development Movement Ltd [1995] 1 W.L.R. 386, [1994] 11 WLUK 148](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I653F8F60E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ff1efe1de24085ade77d4710756c92&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Secretary of State for the Environment Ex p. Rose Theatre Trust Co [1990] 1 Q.B. 504, [1989] 7 WLUK 237](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I655A9170E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ff1efe1de24085ade77d4710756c92&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. D was entitled to be concerned about what he considered to be an illegality in the grant of planning permission for operations which would undoubtedly have an environmental impact and he was neither a trouble maker or busybody; 

(2) there was no evidential basis for D's contention that the decision letter or Circular 16/91 had been overlooked by SCC. It was clear that SCC's decision making process had taken into account the details of the Secretary of State's decision letter refusing permission and the material sections of the Circular, and 

(3) it was arguable that not all of the agreements entered into were not within the ambit of s.106 of the 1990 Act but applying the test in _[DPP v Hutchinson [1990] 2 A.C. 783, [1990] 7 WLUK 167](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AEEF520E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f4ff1efe1de24085ade77d4710756c92&contextData=(sc.Default))_, on the assumption that only agreements within s.106 could be included, the agreement as a whole was lawful. The inclusion in the deed of these obligations did not render the deed ineffectual because the deed also included true planning obligations which came within the criteria set down by the Committee.