### Summary

Non compliance with the terms of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 s.72A(3) did not deprive the court of its duty to consider the making of a confiscation order

### Abstract

The Crown appealed against a decision ([2003] EWCA Crim 1765, [2004] 1 Cr. App. R. (S.) 34) quashing confiscation orders that had been imposed on the respondents (S) following their pleas of guilty to an offence of conspiracy to convert property and to remove it from the jurisdiction knowing or suspecting that it represented the proceeds of criminal conduct. The Court of Appeal had quashed the confiscation orders on the basis they had been made more than six months beyond the date of conviction, contrary to the [Criminal Justice Act 1988 s.72A(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0233440E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f476b22133d4bb4b14d36ba9737587d&contextData=(sc.Default)) . The Court of Appeal had certified two points of law of general public importance. The first was whether the court's common law jurisdiction to adjourn confiscation proceedings was subject to a mandatory time limit of six months from the date of conviction save where "exceptional circumstances" were present. The second was whether, once the court had assumed jurisdiction under s.71 of the Act, its jurisdiction thereafter was extinguished by a failure to comply with the provisions of s.72A of the Act or any common law requirements relating to the postponement or adjournment of the proceedings. S submitted that (1) a strict approach to the construction of s.72A should be adopted; (2) a purposive approach would render wholly ineffective the Parliamentary intent of providing for a specific time limit; (3) injustice had been caused by the delay of the confiscation procedures.

Held, allowing the appeal, that 

(1) the approach of the Court of Appeal, in finding that the judge's failure to consider or make a finding of "exceptional circumstances" deprived the court of jurisdiction to make a confiscation order, had been incorrect. When interpreting statutory provisions, the approach of distinguishing between mandatory requirements and directory requirements should not be applied, as it served to deflect attention from the real issue of whether an act done in breach of the legislative provision was invalid, _Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority 194 C.L.R. 355_ considered. The question concerned the process of making confiscation orders and not the definition of crimes, so that the context required a purposive interpretation of the language of the provision and the scope and object of the whole statute. Emphasis ought to be on the consequences of non compliance, _[Wang v Inland Revenue Commissioner [1994] 1 W.L.R. 1286, [1994] 7 WLUK 236](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF012CE40E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f476b22133d4bb4b14d36ba9737587d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Attorney General's Reference (No.3 of 1999) [2001] 2 A.C. 91, [2000] 12 WLUK 367](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6A403060E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7f476b22133d4bb4b14d36ba9737587d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. 

(2) Parliament's intention of a specific time limit would not be rendered ineffective. Where necessary, the courts could vindicate the scheme adopted by Parliament by the abuse of process jurisdiction. 

(3) The argument of prejudice was overstated and there had been no significant prejudice. Approximately six months of the two year delay was due to the need for the court to resolve points, raised by S, about jurisdiction to make the orders. There had been no suggestion of the Crown or court authorities acting in bad faith. The potential prejudice was decisively outweighed by the countervailing public interest in not allowing a convicted offender to escape conviction for what were no more than bona fide errors in the judicial process. 

(4) There was no common law jurisdiction to adjourn confiscation proceedings. The possibility of coexisting powers was ruled out by s.72A(3) of the Act. 

(5) The requirement of "exceptional circumstances" in s.72A(3), when looked at in the present context, should not be interpreted too narrowly. The court should comply with the six month requirement wherever possible, but, for example, listing difficulties could amount to "exceptional circumstances".