A board of prison visitors is not bound by the technical rules of evidence as applied in the criminal courts, but where hearsay evidence is admitted, the prisoner must be informed of the nature of the evidence and be allowed to cross- examine the witnesses whose evidence was initially before the board in the form of hearsay. 

A riot broke out at a prison and disciplinary proceedings under the Prison Rules 1964 were brought against some prisoners. By virtue of r. 49 (2) every prisoner should be given a full opportunity of hearing the allegations against him and of presenting his own case before the board of visitors. Prior to the hearing, each prisoner was given a booklet stating the procedure laid down in the rules, inter alia, that a prisoner has to ask the chairman permission to call a witness, telling him who the witness was and what his evidence would be. If a witness was called, after hearing the evidence the prisoner may add anything further about the case, comment about all the evidence and point out anything in his favour. The prison governor was present at the hearing with a dossier containing the prison officers' account of the part played by the prisoner in the riot, which was given to the board from time to time. Eight prisoners were found guilty and were awarded punishments. On an application of certiorari to quash the award on the grounds that 

(1) the prisoners had not been given an opportunity of presenting their cases in accordance with r. 49 (2); 

(2) there had been a breach of natural justice in that the board, inter alia, refused to allow them to call witnesses in support of their cases and, had acted upon hearsay evidence from the governor's dossier.

Held, granting the application, that 

(1) s.47(2) of the 1952 Act and r.49(2) of the 1964 Rules were merely declaratory of the basic rule of natural justice; therefore, a person charged with a serious disciplinary offence had the right to be heard himself and to call any evidence which is likely to assist in establishing vital facts in issue; 

(2) the chairman had the discretion to refuse permission to allow a prisoner to call witnesses but it would be improper to refuse simply on the ground that it would cause considerable administrative inconvenience, though the number of witnesses may be limited where the large attendance was an attempt to render the hearing impracticable; 

(3) the Board, though not bound by the technical rules of evidence, may only admit hearsay evidence subject to informing the prisoner of the evidence and allowing him to cross-examine the witnesses whose evidence was initially before the Board in the form of hearsay; that where the witness's attendance was not possible, the hearsay evidence should not be admitted, or, if it had already come to the Board's notice, it should be expressly dismissed from consideration. (Dicta of Lord Denning in _[Kanda v Malaya [1962] A.C. 322, [1962] 4 WLUK 4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID184CDD0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634e607729714d7dae7b02e089898d5f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, Lord Atkin in _[General Medical Council v Spackman [1943] A.C. 627, [1943] 8 WLUK 5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IADF9AED0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634e607729714d7dae7b02e089898d5f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; and Lord Jenkins in _[Ceylon University v Fernando [1960] 1 W.L.R. 223, [1960] 2 WLUK 58](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I83CF2860E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634e607729714d7dae7b02e089898d5f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).