A prisoner has no right to be legally represented when a board of visitors is inquiring into offences against prison discipline, but the board does have a discretion to afford such a prisoner an opportunity to be so represented if he wishes. The applicants, all serving prisoners, were charged with a number of serious offences against prison discipline. Each of them applied to the board of visitors to be legally represented. In each case the applications were turned down.

Held, that the visitors had erred in thinking that they had no discretion to allow legal representation. Whilst it was correct to say that a prisoner had no right to such representation in a proper course the visitors could allow it, and could also allow the prisoner to be assisted by a friend or adviser. Where a prisoner was charged with a serious offence such as mutiny it would be rare for a board of visitors, properly directing themselves, to refuse a request by the prisoner that he should be legally represented. The failure even to consider whether to exercise their discretion was a serious infringement of the prisoners' rights and their convictions by the boards would be quashed ( _[Fraser v Mudge [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1132, [1975] 6 WLUK 42](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA93066F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b1e7835dfaa441fc8ed49e3e94e2cd9b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[McKenzie v McKenzie [1971] P. 33, [1970] 6 WLUK 32](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF63D7050E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b1e7835dfaa441fc8ed49e3e94e2cd9b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Enderby Town Football Club v Football Association [1971] Ch. 591, [1970] 10 WLUK 23](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA178FFD0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b1e7835dfaa441fc8ed49e3e94e2cd9b&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).