The House of Lords held by 3 to 2 that the Chilean Senator Pinochet could be extradited from the UK to Spain on an international warrant alleging crimes against humanity. Pinochet had claimed that he enjoyed state immunity because he had been the President and therefore Head of State of Chile at the relevant time.

Pinochet’s legal team then discovered that one of the law lords in the majority, Lord Hoffmann, was a Director of Amnesty International’s charitable arm and that his wife had worked for its International Secretariat. This was relevant because Amnesty International had been given permission to ‘intervene’ in the case and had made submissions.

---

Following the arrival in the UK of P, head of state of Chile between 1974 and 1980, a provisional warrant for his arrest was granted by a stipendiary magistrate under the [Extradition Act 1989 s.8(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA59F94B0E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d4e9b3b522714899b08e1ce3a1cc9ece&contextData=(sc.Default)), pursuant to an international warrant of arrest issued by a Spanish court, alleging that P had murdered Spanish citizens in Chile. After the Spanish court issued a second warrant alleging five further offences, including torture and the taking of hostages, a second warrant was granted under s.8(1). The Government of Spain appealed against a ruling allowing P's application for judicial review of the s.8(1) warrants on the ground, inter alia, of immunity (Times, November 3, 1998). The question for the court was whether P was entitled to immunity from arrest and extradition proceedings in the UK by virtue of: (1) state immunity under the [State Immunity Act 1978 s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBA3B1270E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d4e9b3b522714899b08e1ce3a1cc9ece&contextData=(sc.Default)); (2) the common law doctrine of act of state; (3) the personal immunity of a head of state conferred by s.20 of the 1978 Act, or (4) as P contended, a residual state immunity which precluded a former state official from prosecution for crimes committed in his official capacity.

Held, allowing the appeal (Lord Slynn and Lord Lloyd dissenting), that 

(1) P could not rely on the immunity from the jurisdiction of the UK courts afforded by s.1 of the 1978 Act, as Part I of that Act did not apply to criminal proceedings; 

(2) the doctrine of act of state, which recognised that some issues of foreign affairs were not justiciable, had to give way to a clear contrary intention of Parliament. Since torture and hostage-taking were both offences under UK statute, Parliament had clearly shown that the doctrine should not apply to such cases; 

(3) while, on a proper construction of s.20 of the 1978 Act, read with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations 1961 Art.39(2), a former head of state continued to enjoy personal immunity from the criminal jurisdiction of the UK in respect of acts performed by him in the exercise of his functions as a head of state, international law made it clear that torture and hostage taking could never be regarded as functions of a head of state, and 

(4) for the same reason, P could not bring himself within the broad principle affording former public officials a degree of personal immunity against prosecution in a foreign state. Per Lord Slynn, dissenting, the combined effect of s.20 of the 1978 Act and Art.39(2) of the Convention was that P was entitled to immunity from arrest and extradition in the UK, and principles of international law were not yet sufficiently certain to defeat that immunity.