### Summary

Although the clear and unequivocal meaning of a local authority's assurances to a housing applicant meant that its decision to remove her from the category of priority homeseeker with a right to bid for permanent accommodation involved resiling from its assurances, the local authority's conduct was not an abuse of power as it was a proportionate response to a pressing and widespread social problem which struck a proper balance between the competing claims of many different interests.

### Abstract

The claimant (X) applied for judicial review of a decision of the defendant local authority that she was no longer entitled to be treated as being within its priority homeseeker category and was now within the homeseeker category.

X was a priority homeseeker on the local authority's housing register. The local authority informed her that because there was a long waiting list she should consider opting for a new scheme under which she would be rehoused quicker, by taking up a private rented tenancy and gave her assurances that she would still retain her right to bid for permanent local authority accommodation. Following consultation, the local authority changed its housing policy resulting in X losing her status as priority homeseeker. It was common ground that being in the homeseeker category meant that X would have no realistic prospect of being allocated a property under the local authority's allocation scheme.

X submitted that the local authority's statements that she would retain priority homeseeking status gave rise to a legitimate expectation and that resiling from what it had previously said amounted to an abuse of power.

### Held

Application refused.

(1) Where a person asserted a legitimate expectation to enforce what amounted to a substantive right based upon a promise or assurance by a public authority, the authority's statement had to be clear, unambiguous and devoid of relevant qualification, _[R. v Inland Revenue Commissioners Ex p. MFK Underwriting Agents Ltd [1990] 1 W.L.R. 1545, [1989] 7 WLUK 90](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D8BE710E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=90a4110427ba4420bc48bb075508268b&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied; (ii) Where a public authority had made statements to an individual that were said to give rise to a legitimate expectation, the court should ascertain the meaning which the authority's statements would reasonably convey to that person in the light of all the background knowledge which he had in the situation in which he was when the statements were made; (iii) Where a person was relying upon a promise or representation by a public authority as giving rise to a substantive right, the court was not limited to a Wednesbury irrationality test but would be required to consider whether the public authority had struck the correct balance between the public interest and the interests of the person relying on the promise or representation; (iv) The test to be applied was whether frustrating the claimant's expectation was so unfair that to take a new and different course would amount to an abuse of power. Once the expectation had been established, the court had to weigh the requirements of fairness against any overriding interest relied upon for the change of policy. Both procedural and substantive unfairness could be taken into account when applying that test; (v) Reliance and detriment were not essential pre-requisites to a finding of unlawful abuse of power but their presence (or absence) could be taken into account in deciding where the balance of fairness lay and whether the authority has acted unlawfully; (vi) The court should give due weight to the proper role of public authorities as agents of change and as being responsible for the adoption and implementation of policies that were in the public interest, even though they might conflict with the interest of private individuals, including those to whom assurances had been given; (vii) Being afforded priority under a housing allocation scheme was no guarantee of being awarded permanent accommodation either at all or within any particular timescale (see paras [18-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). (2) The clear and unequivocal meaning of the local authority's assurances to X meant that its decision to remove her from the category of priority homeseeker with a right to bid for permanent accommodation involved resiling from its assurances. That was prima facie unreasonable and required justification. The practice of offering assurances to persons considering accepting qualifying offers was effectively an element of the local authority's allocation policy, even though it was not formally recorded in it. It was in the area of political policy-making that was a primary function of local authorities and where the court should be cautious about substituting its own judgment for that of a democratically elected local authority about the appropriate balance of fairness to strike between local and national interests. When the local authority proposed to change its policy, it considered and consulted appropriately before implementing change; and when it did so, it offered individual reviews to those adversely affected. No criticism could reasonably be made of the procedure and safeguards adopted by the local authority. It would be wrong to characterise the it's conduct as being an unlawful abuse of power; it was better characterised as a proportionate response to a pressing and widespread social problem which struck a proper balance between the competing claims of many different interests (paras [50-51](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).