#key-case 

Both the High Court and Court of Appeal had held that the NHS Trust was not under a positive obligation to take reasonable steps to prevent a patient from committing suicide when being released from a psychiatric hospital on home leave. In reaching this conclusion, reliance was placed on the fact that she was not formally detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 at the time.

On appeal, the Supreme Court overturned this finding. It held that the NHS Trust had assumed responsibility and control over the patient, who had been admitted to the hospital when facing a real and immediate risk of suicide.

It found that the Trust should have detained the patient under the MHA 1983 when she was insisting on leaving the hospital, as there was a real risk that she would take her life when allowed home. The Trust had therefore failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the real and immediate risk of suicide in breach of Article 2.

---

### Summary

The [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default)) imposed an operational obligation on states to protect mentally ill patients who were not detained under the [Mental Health Act 1983](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60244931E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default)) where there was a real and immediate risk of suicide.

### Abstract

The appellant parents (R) appealed against a decision (_[[2010] EWCA Civ 698, [2011] Q.B. 1019](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8431D2D07D8E11DF82BDEC4447275D11/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that the respondent NHS trust (P) did not have a duty under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default)) to take reasonable steps to protect their mentally ill daughter (M) from the risk of suicide.

M had suffered from depression and had been informally admitted to hospital following a suicide attempt. She was assessed as a high risk of suicide but was allowed two days' home leave during which she committed suicide. R brought proceedings against P for negligence and breach of art.2. The negligence claim was settled but the High Court held that there had been no duty on the hospital under art.2. The Court of Appeal dismissed R's appeal. The issues to be determined were (i) whether the art.2 obligation could in principle be owed to a mentally ill hospital patient who was not detained under the [Mental Health Act 1983](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60244931E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default)); (ii) if yes, whether there was a "real and immediate" risk to M's life of which P had known or ought to have known and which it failed to take reasonable steps to avoid; (iii) if yes, whether R were "victims" within the meaning of [art.34](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C682D7A7A274A98835E110D8A2A3739/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Convention; (iv) if yes, whether R had lost that victim status because P had made adequate redress and had sufficiently acknowledged its breach of duty; (v) if no, whether R's claims were time-barred under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.7(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default)); (vi) if no, whether the Court of Appeal had erred in holding that it would have awarded £5,000 each to R if their claims had been established.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The European Court of Human Rights had not considered whether an operational duty existed to protect against the risk of suicide by informal psychiatric patients. However, the Strasbourg jurisprudence showed that such a duty existed to protect persons from a real and immediate risk of suicide where they were under the state's control, _[Osman v United Kingdom (23452/94) [1999] 1 F.L.R. 193, [1998] 10 WLUK 513](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I14AEDD80E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Oneryildiz v Turkey (48939/99) (No.1) (2004) 39 E.H.R.R. 12, [2002] 6 WLUK 290](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I142E89F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Powell v United Kingdom (Admissibility) (45305/99) [2000] Inquest L.R. 19, [2000] 5 WLUK 76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I418EF010E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Savage v South Essex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust [2008] UKHL 74, [2009] 1 A.C. 681, [2008] 12 WLUK 267](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBD93F4C0C73411DD9428CA1F1923C0C6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. In the instant case, P owed an operational duty to M to take reasonable steps to protect her from the real and immediate risk of suicide. She had been admitted to hospital as a real suicide risk. She was extremely vulnerable and P had assumed responsibility for her. She was under its control. If she had insisted on leaving the hospital, the authorities could and should have exercised their powers under the 1983 Act to prevent her. In reality, the difference between M's position and that of a hypothetical detained psychiatric patient in similar circumstances was one of form, not substance. M's position was far closer to that of such a hypothetical patient than to a patient undergoing treatment in a public hospital for a physical illness. Those factors led to the conclusion that the operational duty existed in M's case (see paras [15-34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) There was a real risk that M would take her life when allowed home. That risk existed when she left hospital and continued and increased during the two days, which was sufficient to make the risk immediate. P were or ought to have been aware of that risk. The standard demanded for the performance of the operational duty was one of reasonableness, which included "consideration of the circumstances of the case, the ease or difficulty of taking precautions and the resources available", _[Officer L, Re [2007] UKHL 36, [2007] 1 W.L.R. 2135, [2007] 7 WLUK 880](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I003854903FE311DCB44CE4BE6C591227/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The decision to allow M two days' home leave was one that no reasonable psychiatric practitioner would have made. P had failed to do all that could reasonably have been expected to prevent the real and immediate risk of M's suicide (paras [35-43](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) The ECtHR had repeatedly stated that family members could bring claims in their own right in relation to the investigative and substantive obligations under art.2 (paras [44-48](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) R had not renounced an art.2 claim by settling the negligence claim. No such claim had been made in the negligence proceedings because it was not available in English law. In the absence of an express renunciation, the settlement had no legal effect on R's status as victims for the purposes of their art.2 claim. There had been no adequate redress as there had been no compensation at all for the non-pecuniary damage suffered by R as a result of the breach of art.2, _[Bubbins v United Kingdom (50196/99) (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 24, [2005] 3 WLUK 564](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7CE76D50E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6183b2692ce14e6eb90c6a75ab95aa7d&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Had it been necessary to decide the issue, P had in substance acknowledged its breach of the art.2 duty (paras [49-63, 64-72](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(5) The extension of time would be granted. The required extension was short, P had suffered no prejudice by the delay, R had acted reasonably and, most importantly, they had a good claim for breach of art.2 (paras [73-79](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(6) R had expressed their anxiety to the hospital about the dangers of allowing M home. That must have made M's death all the more distressing. It was a bad breach of the art.2 duty, which merited an award well above the lower end of the range. R would be awarded £5,000 each (paras [80-88](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).