### Summary

The requirement under the [Gender Recognition Act 2004](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5F92B790E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)) for an applicant for a gender recognition certificate to prove that they were suffering from, or had had, the "disorder" variously referred to as gender dysphoria, breached the applicant's rights under [ECHR art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)). The requirement to provide a specific diagnosis which was defined as a disorder failed to strike a fair balance between the interests of the applicant and those of the community generally. It was unnecessary and unjustified. However, the Government was entitled to require that applicants provide evidence from an appropriately qualified medical practitioner which set out why they were seeking a legal change of gender.

### Abstract

The court considered whether the requirement in the [Gender Recognition Act 2004](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5F92B790E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)) which provided that an applicant for a gender recognition certificate (GRC) had to provide a diagnosis of gender dysphoria by means of specified medical evidence was compatible with the applicant's rights under [ECHR](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The applicant had been living as a trans woman since 1999. She had changed her name by deed poll but had not yet had gender reassignment surgery. She wanted to apply for a GRC so that she could legally be recognised as a person of her acquired gender and could obtain a new birth certificate showing that gender. Under the Act, applicants for a GRC had to provide a report from a registered medical practitioner or registered psychologist practising in the field of gender dysphoria, which included details of the diagnosis of the applicant's gender dysphoria. [Section 25](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60C2F961E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act defined "gender dysphoria" as "the disorder variously referred to as gender dysphoria, gender identity disorder and transsexualism." The applicant felt strongly that legal recognition of her gender identity should not be contingent upon having to demonstrate that she suffered from a "disorder".

The applicant submitted that the requirement under the Act to provide a diagnosis of gender dysphoria was not compatible with her rights under [ECHR art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)) and/or [art.14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4B389092B9994E42A84BEAB24213F0A3/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Held

Judgment accordingly.

**Proper approach for the court -** Although the ECtHR had left the conditions upon which gender recognition would be granted in the UK to its national authorities, the court, whilst respecting the principle of the separation of powers and the respective institutional competences of the three branches of government, had to form its own judgement as to the ECHR compatibility of those arrangements as a matter of domestic law. The ultimate test was whether the impugned provisions of the Act struck a fair balance between the competing interests of the individual and the community as a whole (see paras [116, 118](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Fair balance: the requirement for a diagnosis -** The requirement that a relevant diagnosis by a specialist in the relevant area be provided in support of an application for a GRC was, and remained, within the discretionary area of judgement available to Parliament. In reaching that conclusion, the court was mindful of the approach adopted by the ECtHR in _A.P. v France unreported_ where the conditions under which legal gender recognition was afforded was left to Member States to determine, given the sensitive moral and ethical issues which that judgement entailed. Although a trend was starting to emerge of moving away from a requirement for a mental health diagnosis, many Council of Europe countries still considered it an appropriate requirement. The instant case was not an appropriate case to "forge ahead" of the Strasbourg jurisprudence and require recognition to be granted in the absence of a relevant specialist diagnosis. The Act struck a fair balance between the needs of the applicant and the community as a whole. The Government wanted to retain a medical element to the process partly to deter vexatious applications or abuse of the GRC process, and partly to provide appropriate support, advice and safeguards for applicants. That was consistent with the recognition by the ECtHR in A.P. v France that a requirement for a mental health diagnosis could be of utility and important in assessing the appropriateness of a legal change in gender identity as a means of safeguarding an applicant's own interests and in the interests of legal certainty for the community more generally, A.P. v France applied. The legal change in a person's gender was a significant and formal change in their status with potentially far-reaching consequences. It was not easily undone. The State was entitled to require that an applicant for a GRC provide evidence from an appropriately qualified medical practitioner which set out why the applicant was seeking a legal change of gender and provided a measure of reassurance that that had been discussed with an independent expert and reflected upon carefully by the applicant (paras [131-133, 135](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Fair balance - the required diagnosis** - Under the Act, an applicant for a GRC had to show that they had, or had had, a "disorder." However, the Government did not now contend that a transgender person necessarily had, or had ever had, a disorder: its public-facing documents said the opposite. Furthermore, both the World Health Organisation's International Classification of Diseases and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders had clearly and purposefully moved away from categorising the relevant diagnoses as being of a mental disorder. The definition in s.25(1) was a legacy of the Act being drafted at a time when a different approach prevailed. It was now an unnecessary affront to the dignity of a person applying for gender recognition through the legal process set out for that purpose by Parliament (para.[140](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Parliament had determined that, in the UK, transgender persons were entitled to obtain a GRC without gender reassignment surgery, in order to respect and give effect to that aspect of their private life, bearing in mind the principle of autonomy. The system was designed to give effect to rights within the art.8 sphere and plainly engaged them, _[Carpenter v Secretary of State for Justice [2015] EWHC 464 (Admin), [2015] 1 W.L.R. 4111, [2015] 2 WLUK 888](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I10DA4480C10311E4BD93A1EFB21896F0/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. There was no reason why the grant of such recognition should or must be conditional on an applicant proving that that element of their private life amounted to a disorder (para.[141](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Attempts to defend the retention of the present definition of gender dysphoria, on the basis that medical practitioners were familiar with that diagnosis and that a change in practice might present difficulties, were not convincing (para.[144](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Accordingly, although the Government's decision to continue to require supporting medical evidence and a specific diagnosis could be viewed as part of the "proper checks and balances" which the State was entitled to adopt, the requirement that that diagnosis be one which was specifically and expressly defined as a "disorder" was not (para.[146](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Addressing the identified incompatibility** - The incompatibility should be addressed by, at the very least, removing the reference in s.25(1) to the required diagnosis being one which was of a disorder. It might helpfully be achieved by permitting the required diagnosis to be one of gender incongruence or, alternatively, of gender dysphoria or gender incongruence. The court would hear the parties further on the question of remedy and, in particular, whether there should be a standard declaration setting out how the impugned provisions were to be interpreted pursuant to the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B25DFF0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)) or a declaration of incompatibility under [s.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B265520E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=26c8a0f1f3924b30be55a00f904d8846&contextData=(sc.Default)) (paras [156-157](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Article 14 claim** - The applicant's art.14 claim did not advance her case beyond her direct reliance on art.8. Being a transgender woman was an "other status" which would warrant protection under art.14. However, she was not in an analogous position to her comparator, namely a non-transgender woman; and, in any event, the difference in treatment between the two was objectively justified (para.[151](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).