The applicant had been given an undertaking by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland that a public inquiry would be held into allegations of collusion by the security forces in the murder of her husband, a prominent lawyer in Northern Ireland, by loyalist paramilitaries.

Following a general election, a new government decided not to hold a public inquiry on the ground that it would be potentially lengthy, costly and procedurally difficult and might be unworkable in light of national security issues. It decided to hold a paper-based review by an independent person instead.

The Supreme Court held that, where a decision concerning macro-political issues was made in good faith on genuine policy grounds, it would be very difficult for a person to enforce compliance with a legitimate expectation. The decision not to hold the public inquiry was held to be lawful on this basis.

---

### Summary

An independent review, lacking the power to compel witnesses, into the murder of a solicitor by paramilitaries in Northern Ireland, in which collusion by state agents had been alleged, had not been an inquiry compliant with [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default)). The review had lacked the means to identify those implicated in the death.

### Abstract

The appellant appealed against the refusal of judicial review of the secretary of state's decision not to hold a public inquiry into the murder of her husband.

The appellant's husband was a solicitor who had been murdered in 1989 by paramilitaries in Northern Ireland. She alleged that state agents had colluded in the murder. Several investigations were conducted, but there was no public inquiry and no examination of the state collusion allegations. In 2001, the British government agreed to abide by the recommendations arising from a judicial investigation. In 2004, that investigation recommended that a public inquiry with the power to compel witnesses was required. However, in 2011 the government decided to hold an independent review (the de Silva review), with no power to compel witnesses, instead of a public inquiry. The review concluded that state agents had been involved in serious human rights violations, but expressed doubt as to whether the murder would have taken place had it not been for state involvement. The Court of Appeal rejected the appellant's arguments that she had a legitimate expectation that a public inquiry would be held, that a consultation process held before the decision not to hold an inquiry had been a sham with a predetermined outcome, and that the decision violated the state's procedural obligation under [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default)) to investigate the death.

### Held

Appeal allowed in part.

**Legitimate expectation -** Where a clear and unambiguous undertaking had been made, the authority giving the undertaking would not be allowed to depart from it unless it was fair to do so. Although it was not necessary to decide in the instant case, the court disagreed with any suggestion that it was a prerequisite of a substantive legitimate expectation claim that the person relying on it could show that they had suffered a detriment, _[R. v North and East Devon HA Ex p. Coughlan [2001] Q.B. 213, [1999] 7 WLUK 371](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B8B1FC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (see paras [62-72](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). Where political issues overtook a promise given by government, and where contemporary considerations impelled a different course, then, provided a bona fide decision was taken on genuine policy grounds not to adhere to the original undertaking, it was difficult for a person holding a legitimate expectation to enforce compliance with it, _[R. (on the application of Nadarajah) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, Times, December 14, 2005, [2005] 11 WLUK 580](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7E78C640E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The appellant's allegation of a pre-determined outcome was serious and would require clear evidence before it could be accepted. The findings of the courts below rejecting it could not be faulted: there was no sustainable evidence in its favour (paras [74-81](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**ECHR art.2 -** The court considered whether the appellant could maintain an action based on the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default)) when the murder had taken place 11 years before the Act's entry into force in 2000. A genuine connection had been established between the murder and the entry into force, _[Silih v Slovenia (71463/01) (2009) 49 E.H.R.R. 37, [2009] 4 WLUK 274](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I967874B0B93711DE9D75CCA7968CE3E6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Janowiec v Russia (55508/07) (2014) 58 E.H.R.R. 30, [2013] 10 WLUK 638](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICD4E3680BBFA11E38AE0E8224CAFEDC2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Although the lapse of time should not normally exceed 10 years, that was not an immutable requirement, _[Mocanu v Romania (10865/09) (2015) 60 E.H.R.R. 19, [2014] 9 WLUK 413](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I05B7C120CD9411E4B0C3859E0D2BAB5E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[McCaughey's Application for Judicial Review, Re [2011] UKSC 20, [2012] 1 A.C. 725, [2011] 5 WLUK 481](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7413DA8081A511E087319DC25C5947A9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [107-113](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The Court of Appeal had held that the evidence emerging during the de Silva review had not been sufficient to revive, in accordance with _[Brecknell v United Kingdom (32457/04) (2008) 46 E.H.R.R. 42, [2007] 11 WLUK 675](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC553D860A55211DCA8E9CBAE832EBB63/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=08eee0d6244240c991fc05e28b1531b2&contextData=(sc.Default))_, the art.2 procedural obligation. However, Brecknell said that any information with the potential to undermine the conclusions of an earlier investigation would prompt revival. The review had expressed doubt as to the role of state agents; that doubt was sufficient to warrant further investigation. Although the police had found that the evidence did not afford any basis for further investigation or prosecution, that did not determine whether art.2 had been met: the need for effective investigation went well beyond facilitating a prosecution. The constraints placed on the review had undermined its capability to establish vital facts such as the identity of those involved. Being capable of identifying those responsible involved having the means to identify those implicated and the will and opportunity to expose them. The review had not been an in-depth investigation with all the tools normally available to someone tasked with uncovering the truth of what actually happened. The tentative and qualified way in which the reviewer had felt it necessary to express many of his critical findings bore witness to the review's inability to deliver an art.2 compliant inquiry. The review had been denied the means to identify the people involved in bringing about the murder. It might have done so had it been able to compel witnesses and probe their accounts and if it had been able to press those whose testimony might have led to the identification of those involved. Absent those vital steps, the conclusion that an art.2 compliant inquiry had not yet taken place was inescapable, Brecknell applied (paras [117-140](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). A declaration would be made to that effect. That did not mean that a public inquiry would be ordered. It was for the state to decide what form of investigation was required in order to meet art.2 (para.[153](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
