The case concerned the introduction by the Home Secretary of a new policy to deny parole to certain classes of prisoners unless there were exceptional circumstances. This adversely affected the four applicants, who all had excellent prison records and had expected parole to be granted within the following year under the previous policy.

In a unanimous decision of the House of Lords, Lord Scarman reached the following conclusion:

> 'It is said that the refusal to except them from the new policy was an unlawful act on the part of the Secretary of State in that his decision frustrated their expectation. But what was their legitimate expectation? Given the substance and purpose of the legislative provisions governing parole, the most that a convicted prisoner can legitimately expect is that his case will be examined individually in the light of whatever policy the Secretary of State sees fit to adopt, provided always that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of the discretion conferred upon him by the statute. Any other view would entail the conclusion that the unfettered discretion conferred by the statute upon the minister can in some cases be restricted so as to hamper, or even to prevent, changes of policy.'

---

The Secretary of State for the Home Department is not obliged to consult the Parole Board before altering the policy to be followed in the exercise of his discretion to release prisoners on parole nor is the policy he chose to adopt unlawful. Under the [Criminal Justice Act 1967](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6071F400E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=66b8ff68a1a6410fbff0faa9d5390698&contextData=(sc.Default)) the Secretary of State for the Home Department had the discretion to release on parole prisoners serving sentences of more than four years imprisonment, or two years if the offence involved violence or drug trafficking, upon the recommendation of the Parole Board. In 1983 the Secretary of State for the Home Department decided to adopt a policy pursuant to which prisoners serving more than five years' imprisonment for offences involving violence or drug trafficking would not be released on parole until the final months of their sentence and prisoners serving life sentences for certain types of murder would not be released on parole until at least 20 years had been served. The policy provided for early release if there were exceptional circumstances or compelling reasons to make an exception. The applicants were all prisoners serving sentences who would have been released on parole in the near future but for the Home Secretary's change of policy. The applicants sought judicial review arguing that in failing to consult the Parole Board about the new policy the Secretary of State for the Home Department acted unlawfully and that the policy itself was unlawful.

Held, dismissing the appeal from the Court of Appeal, that 

(1) the factors of deterrence, retribution and public confidence in the administration of criminal justice were material matters to his consideration in adopting the policy. Having considered those matters it could not be said that the Secretary of State for the Home Department acted unlawfully in failing to consult the Parole Board before adopting the new policy; 

(2) the decision to release a prisoner on parole involved complex considerations which could not be dealt with properly without a policy to follow. The policy adopted contained a sufficient element of necessary individual consideration so that it could not be said that the new policy did not constitute a refusal of parole for prisoners of the classes concerned; 

(3) the policy did not have the effect of imposing greater sentences on the prisoners concerned as their sentences as determined by the court would not be exceeded (_[R. v Port of London Authority Ex p. Kynoch Ltd [1919] 1 K.B. 176, [1918] 11 WLUK 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60CC7DD0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=66b8ff68a1a6410fbff0faa9d5390698&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp [1948] 1 K.B. 223, [1947] 11 WLUK 26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I68410501E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=66b8ff68a1a6410fbff0faa9d5390698&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[British Oxygen Co Ltd v Minister of Technology [1969] 2 Ch. 174, [1969] 2 WLUK 57](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7B103C50E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=66b8ff68a1a6410fbff0faa9d5390698&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _Warden, Lewisburg Penitentiary v Marrero 417 U.S. 653_ considered, _[CREEDNZ Inc v Governor General [1981] 1 N.Z.L.R. 172, [1981] 7 WLUK 287](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I255461A02DAA11EC8C6596C67312BE77/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=66b8ff68a1a6410fbff0faa9d5390698&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[Attorney General ex rel Tilley v Wandsworth LBC [1981] 1 W.L.R. 854, [1981] 2 WLUK 39](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69A0E320E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=66b8ff68a1a6410fbff0faa9d5390698&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).