### Summary

A non-derogating control order which, among other things, imposed an 18-hour curfew and prohibited social contact with anybody who was not authorised by the Home Office, amounted to a deprivation of liberty. The court had not erred in quashing the order (as opposed to amending it), since defects in such an order could not be cured by amending specific obligations and it would be contrary to principle to decline to quash an order, made without power to make it, which had unlawfully deprived a person of his liberty.

### Abstract

The secretary of state appealed against the dismissal of his appeal ([_[2006] EWCA Civ 1141](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I94ABDF50237111DBA1BE83A3E64D3789/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default))_) against a decision that obligations imposed on the respondents (D) in control orders made pursuant to the [Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8C1A6711E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default)) violated the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default)).

D were six respondents in four appeals heard by the instant court at the same time. D were subject to non-derogating control orders. It was common ground that none of the cases in the instant appeal fell within any of the exemption classes listed in Art.5(1)(a) to Art.5(1)(f). As a result of the orders, D, who were all single men, were confined to their one-bedroom flats save for between the hours of 10.00 and 16.00, and even then, had limited movement in restricted urban areas; visitors had to be authorised by the Home Office and D were prohibited from meeting anybody who did not have Home Office clearance; the residences were subject to spot searches by the police, and D were electronically tagged and forbidden to use or possess any communications equipment apart from a single fixed telephone line in their flat. At first instance, the length of the curfew period, the extent of the obligations and their intrusive impact on the ability to lead a normal life had been likened to detention in an open prison. At a subsequent hearing, the Court of Appeal had agreed that the facts of the cases amounted to a deprivation of liberty.

The secretary of state repeated the assertions submitted to the Court of Appeal and 

(1) stressed the imperative duty of democratic governments to do what could lawfully be done to protect the public against the grave threat presented by the criminal activity of terrorists; 

(2) maintained that even if the court had been correct to find that the control orders wrongly deprived D of their liberty, [s.3(12)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I99B8A5F0E45111DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act supported a view that only some of the individual obligations ought to have been quashed, rather than the entire control order.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(Lord Hoffman and Lord Carswell dissenting) 

(1) Neither the judge at first instance nor the Court of Appeal had erred in their legal reasoning and the instant court would have reached the same conclusion as they did. The effect of the 18-hour curfew, coupled with the effective exclusion of all but the most brave of social visitors meant that D were practically in solitary confinement for an indefinite duration. The area open to them during their six non-curfew hours was not objectionable, but they were located in an unfamiliar area, devoid of social contacts and their lives were wholly regulated by the Home Office, _[Guzzardi v Italy (A/39) (1981) 3 E.H.R.R. 333, [1980] 11 WLUK 49](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB5EB86E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Engel v Netherlands (A/22) (1979-80) 1 E.H.R.R. 647, [1976] 6 WLUK 17](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA1889030E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. 

(2) The secretary of state had had no power to make an order that was incompatible with Art.5 and any such order was, on well-known principles, a nullity. Defects could not be cured by amending specific obligations and it would be contrary to principle to decline to quash an order, made without power to make it, which had unlawfully deprived a person of his liberty. 

(3) (Per Lord Hoffman) It was clear from the unqualified nature of the right to liberty and its place in the scheme of the other qualified Convention rights, that it dealt with literal physical restraint. In order to preserve the key distinction between the unqualified right to liberty and the qualified rights of freedom of movement, communication and association and so forth, it was essential not to give an over-expansive interpretation to the concept of deprivation of liberty, _[A v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 56, [2005] 2 A.C. 68, [2004] 12 WLUK 462](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I46E919B1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7925d0f0e7cc4b60aea497dc14fd9fc8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. D's situation could not be compared with that of somebody who was in prison. Even if it was accepted that the control order violated D's right to liberty, there was no conceptual reason why the court could not modify the order so as to make it lawful, and the judge's failure to accept that he had such power had been an improper exercise of his discretion.