### Summary

The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission had no standing to seek a declaration that abortion law in Northern Ireland was incompatible with [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) because it had not instituted proceedings by identifying any unlawful act or any actual or potential victim. Although the Supreme Court therefore had no jurisdiction to make a declaration of incompatibility, it considered that the current law was disproportionate and incompatible with art.8 insofar as it prohibited abortion in cases of fatal foetal abnormality and where pregnancy resulted from rape or incest.

### Abstract

The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission appealed against the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal's refusal to declare that Northern Irish abortion law was incompatible with [ECHR art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The [Offences Against the Person Act 1861 s.58](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C1A7650E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.59](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C1AEB80E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) and the [Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 1945 s.25](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF32E978096A411E89EA5A0B238A574A1/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) criminalised abortion in Northern Ireland unless there was a risk to the mother's life or of serious injury to her physical or mental health. The Commission had sought declarations of incompatibility in cases of serious and fatal abnormality, rape and incest. The Court of Appeal had declined to make declarations of incompatibility in respect of either art.3 or art.8.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

**Commission's standing to bring the proceedings** (Lady Hale and Lords Wilson and Kerr dissenting) - The Commission claimed that it had power to bring the proceedings under the [Northern Ireland Act 1998 s.69(5)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2EF6E520E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)). However, under [s.71(2C)(a)(ii)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B29FEA0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)), proceedings relying wholly or partly on s.69(5)(b) were "human rights proceedings" and subject to the restrictions in [s.71(2B)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B29FEA0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)). Under s.71(2B)(a), the Commission did not itself need to be a victim or potential victim of the unlawful act to which the proceedings related. However, where the Commission was instituting human rights proceedings there had to be an actual or potential victim of an unlawful act to which the proceedings related. The concept of an unlawful act in s.71(2B) was defined as an unlawful act of the kind identified in the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.7](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B27DBC0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) (the HRA). It therefore did not apply to an authority's act which was compelled by a provision of primary legislation or which was to give effect to or enforce provisions of or made under primary legislation which could not be read or given effect in a way which was compatible with ECHR rights. It followed that the Commission's powers under s.69 and s.71 did not include either instituting or intervening in proceedings where the only complaint was that primary legislation was incompatible with ECHR rights. A reading of s.71 as a whole made it clear that it had been envisaged as establishing a limited jurisdiction. Parliament had limited the Commission's role to giving assistance under s.69(5)(a) and s.70 and to instituting or intervening in proceedings involving an actual or potential victim or an unlawful act. The Supreme Court had no jurisdiction to give any relief in respect of the challenge to Northern Ireland abortion law (see paras [42, 54, 56-61, 65, 70-71](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(Per Lady Hale and Lord Kerr) Section 71(21B) and s.71(2C) dealt only with proceedings brought by the Commission, or interventions by it in proceedings brought by others in respect of claims that a public authority had acted or proposed to act unlawfully. They did not apply to or limit the Commission's general power to challenge the compatibility of legislation of any sort under [s.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B25DFF0E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B265520E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the HRA. The only restriction upon the Commission's right to bring proceedings under s.69(5)(b) was that the proceedings had to involve law or practice relating to human rights claims, _[R. (on the application of Rusbridger) v Attorney General [2003] UKHL 38, [2004] 1 A.C. 357, [2003] 6 WLUK 663](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7EFB8AD0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] UKHL 30, [2004] 2 A.C. 557, [2004] 6 WLUK 427](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE780690E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Wilson v First County Trust Ltd [2003] UKHL 40, [2004] 1 A.C. 816, [2003] 7 WLUK 303](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I01B852A0E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The natural meaning of a power under s.71(2B)(c) to act where there "would be" victims clearly indicated an intention that the Commission should be able pre-emptively to prevent human rights violations rather than merely bring post-hoc proceedings relating to actual violations. An interpretation which gave effect to the ascertainable will of Parliament should be preferred to a literal construction which would frustrate the legislation's true purpose (paras [17-18, 184, 188-190, 195-196, 202-213](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**ECHR art.8** (Lords Reed and Lloyd-Jones dissenting, Lady Black dissenting only in relation to pregnancy resulting from incest or rape and concurring in relation to fatal foetal abnormality) - If the court had had jurisdiction to give relief, it would have concluded that the current law was incompatible with art.8 insofar as it prohibited abortion in cases of fatal foetal abnormality, rape and incest, but not insofar as it prohibited abortion in cases of serious foetal abnormality. It was common ground that the prohibition of abortion in those three circumstances was an interference with the right to respect for private life within the scope of art.8 and that the interference was not justified under art.8(2). The issue was whether the interference was necessary in a democratic society in the sense that it struck a fair balance between the rights of the pregnant woman and the community's interest in protecting the foetus. In considering whether it was appropriate to make a declaration of incompatibility, the instant case was different from _[R. (on the application of Nicklinson) v Ministry of Justice [2014] UKSC 38, [2015] A.C. 657, [2014] 6 WLUK 769](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC1658510FC6111E3B810FA2524FEA3E1/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default))_. There was no question of a balance being struck between the interests of two different living persons. The unborn foetus was not a person in law, although its potential had to be respected. Nicklinson had also been decided against a background where the UK Parliament's attitude was similar to that of almost the whole of the rest of Europe. Northern Ireland was, in contrast, almost alone in the strictness of its current law. The close ties between the different parts and people of the UK made it appropriate to examine the justification for the differences with care. Further, the difficulty with allowing the Northern Ireland Assembly the opportunity of completing its unfinished examination of the present law was that there was no assurance as to when or if it would do so, Nicklinson considered (paras [42, 104, 114-115, 117, 119-120, 278, 298, 326](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). In the case of fatal foetal abnormality, there could be no community interest in obliging a woman to carry a pregnancy to term if she did not wish to do so. The present law could not be regarded as proportionate. It failed to attach any weight to personal autonomy. Serious foetal abnormality, however, was a different matter. In principle, a disabled child should be treated as having exactly the same human worth as a non-disabled child. It was not possible to impugn, as incompatible with art.8, legislation which prohibited abortion of a foetus diagnosed as likely to be severely disabled. The current law was also disproportionate in cases of pregnancy due to rape and could not be justified. A blanket prohibition of abortion in cases of incest was not proportionate. The most typical cases of abortion involved exploitative relationships with young or younger female relatives. The agony of having to carry a child to birth and have a potential responsibility for, and lifelong relationship with, the child, against the mother's will, could not be justified (paras [27-29, 123-128, 132-133, 135, 331-332](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**ECHR art.3** (Lords Kerr and Wilson dissenting, Lady Hale declining to decide on incompatibility in relation to art.3) - The right not to be subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment under art.3 was absolute. It could not be said that in every case where a woman was denied a lawful abortion in Northern Ireland in the three circumstances at issue, she would suffer so severely that her rights under art.3 had been violated. It would depend on the facts. The law was bound to operate incompatibly in some cases, but it was not a situation where the operation of the law was bound to produce incompatible results in every case. The great majority of Northern Irish women wishing to terminate their pregnancy in such circumstances were able to do so by travelling elsewhere. Although that could be a distressing and expensive experience, it did not give rise, either generally or necessarily in any case, to distress of such severity as to infringe art.3. The 1861 and 1945 Acts were not, of themselves, incompatible with art.3, _[A v Ireland (25579/05) [2011] 3 F.C.R. 244, [2010] 12 WLUK 539](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I12B7A1003B0E11E0B8F3ADC38E8DD197/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7931f7b9ddf743de9aec57801e4fe693&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [32-34, 95, 100, 103, 353-354](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).