In ex parte Cunningham, the court had found that the nature of the relevant decision had been an unexpected or 'aberrant' one, and so the general rule that there was no duty to give reasons should be departed from. The result of the case had ‘called out’ for reasons to be given.

---

The Board appealed against the grant of judicial review of its decision to award C GBP 6,500 compensation following 23 years service as a prison officer and the failure of the Board to give reasons for that decision, (Times, June 13, 1990). The Board objected to giving reasons, claiming: 
(1) It would have an adverse effect on the informality of the proceedings; and 
(2) It would encourage applicants to rely on a body of precedent.

Held: Appeal dismissed. The issue was whether natural justice required the Board to give reasons for its decision, Lloyd v McMahon [1987] 1 A.C. 625 applied in so far as the court could impose a common law duty to provide reasons. As the Board's character was one of an independent public law body with a judicial function (from which there was no right of appeal) fairness required it to give outline reasons to show how it was directing its mind, _[R. v Immigration Appeal Tribunal Ex p. Khan (Mahmud) [1983] Q.B. 790, [1983] 1 WLUK 934](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D6A7C60E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b79353a8c7e451d9241ae66839d63d1&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, (McCowan, L.J. dissenting). The Board's objections to giving reasons were unconvincing, as an industrial tribunal did not lack formality because of its duty to give reasons and to be consistent with each applicant. The judge had been correct to hold that C had a legitimate expectation that reasons would be given, (Legatt, L.J. dissenting) as the Minister for the Civil Service had made assurances that a civil servant had the right to apply to a tribunal “analogous” to an industrial tribunal and receive equivalent treatment under the same law.