1. A chief constable is not the servant of the Watch Committee, who can dismiss him only under the [Municipal Corporations Act 1882 s.191(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1E1100E0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc05c9bbce4b4b11927352542fb9a89a&contextData=(sc.Default)) and in deciding whether to do so they must observe the rules of natural justice, by informing him of the charges and giving him an opportunity to be heard. Further, the requirements of the discipline regulations made under the Police Act 1919 must be observed if the dismissal is on the ground of misconduct rather than that of inefficiency or inadequacy. 
2. An appeal to the Secretary of State for the Home Department under the Police Appeals Act 1927 although the decision is "final and binding," does not exclude recourse to the courts if the decision from which it is made is itself a nullity In 1956 the plaintiff was appointed chief constable of a borough police force, the appointment being subject to the Police Acts and regulations. In 1957 he was arrested and charged (with others) with conspiracy to obstruct the course of justice. The Watch Committee then suspended him from duty. He was acquitted of the charge, but in sentencing others the judge commented adversely on his character and ability. In 1958 he was charged with corruption, and though no evidence was offered on this charge, the judge again commented adversely on his suitability for his post. He then applied to be reinstated; but the Watch Committee, in exercise of their power under s.191 of the Act of 1882, dismissed him from his office. His appeal to the Secretary of State for the Home Department was dismissed, and he brought an action for a declaration that his dismissal was illegal, ultra vires and void.

Held, that as the requirements of natural justice were not observed by the Watch Committee the declaration should be made. _[Cooper v Wilson [1937] 2 K.B. 309, [1937] 3 WLUK 61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8E4142B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc05c9bbce4b4b11927352542fb9a89a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and Hogg v. Scott [1947-51] C.L.Y. 7343 considered; _[Nakkuda Ali v MF de S Jayaratne [1951] A.C. 66, [1950] 6 WLUK 86](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0A2FF1F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc05c9bbce4b4b11927352542fb9a89a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished and _[De Verteuil v Knaggs [1918] A.C. 557, [1918] 3 WLUK 38](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I95D0AF70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc05c9bbce4b4b11927352542fb9a89a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Annamunthodo v Oilfields Workers Trade Union [1961] A.C. 945, [1961] 7 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5E6A1940E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=cc05c9bbce4b4b11927352542fb9a89a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.