The claimant sought a declaration against the Environment Agency, after it changed its position on ownership of a stretch of waterway. For some years the waterway had been treated as a private right of way attached to the claimant’s property. However, the Agency later decided that it had always provided for public access. The Court of Appeal held that, as there had been no statutory power to extinguish the public access rights, the claimant could not rely upon the Agency’s past conduct to found a legitimate expectation.

---

### Summary

The common assumption of the claimant and defendant before November 2000 that part of the River Thames known as Hedsor Water was private gave rise to a legitimate expectation, but public rights of navigation on the Thames could not be extinguished except by statute so that the court could not give effect to the legitimate expectation at common law, and although the expectation was a possession protected by the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch.1 Part II Art.1, it gave way to an overriding public interest.

### Abstract

R appealed against a decision ([2002] EWHC 2785, [2003] Ch. 581) that public rights of navigation, PRN, existed over a stretch of the River Thames. R owned a house and land on the bank of a stretch of the non tidal part of the natural mainstream of the River Thames known as Hedsor Water. From time immemorial PRN had existed over the Thames and they had been continued under the Thames Conservancy Act 1932 . Hedsor Water was difficult to navigate and it had been bypassed by a "cut" made in 1830. For many years the relevant navigation authorities had treated Hedsor Water as private, having erected weirs at both ends and having erected, or permitted the erection of, signs indicating that Hedsor Water was private and that there was no thoroughfare. In 2000 the Agency, as the relevant navigation authority, reconsidered the position and asserted that PRN continued to exist over Hedsor Water. R sought a declaration that Hedsor Water had become a permanently private water by virtue of the [Thames Preservation Act 1885](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2E2AB160C57A11E5BC759C9E82F24198/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c280941deb9b49c39ac0ab7868240f84&contextData=(sc.Default)) , and, alternatively, that she had a legitimate expectation at common law or by virtue of the [Human Rights Act 1998](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5FB840F0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c280941deb9b49c39ac0ab7868240f84&contextData=(sc.Default)) of enjoying Hedsor Water as a private water. The judge decided both issues against R, holding that Hedsor Water was subject to PRN and that the Agency was entitled to perform its statutory functions with respect to Hedsor Water.

Held, dismissing the appeal, that 

(1) PRN over the Thames could only be lost by legislation and there was no provision giving the navigation authorities express or implied power to extinguish PRN on the Thames. PRN were not lost merely by disuse. There was no agreement between R's predecessor in title and the navigation authorities that Hedsor Water was a private channel. Section 2 of the 1885 Act did not avail R because it protected riparian owners in respect of the extension of PRN to channels over which no PRN had existed previously, whereas Hedsor Water was subject to existing PRN. Hedsor Water had not been enjoyed as a private channel by any "lawful title" for 20 years before the passing of the 1885 Act. Section 5 of the 1885 Act legitimised obstructions which had been maintained for 20 years before the commencement of the Act, but only applied to obstructions placed by riparian owners and not to obstructions such as the weirs which had been erected by the navigation authorities under their statutory powers, and 

(2) at least since 1920, and arguably since 1897, the navigation authorities had believed that Hedsor Water was private. There was the necessary representation that there were no PRN over Hedsor Water to found a legitimate expectation. The fact that Hedsor Water, if private, would constitute a unique exception to the public navigation of the Thames should have led the navigation authorities to investigate the position long before 2000. R could not reasonably have believed that Hedsor Water was private. A legitimate expectation at common law could only be founded on a lawful representation or practice and the claim was bound to fail because the navigation authorities had no power to extinguish PRN over Hedsor Water. Even if there had been a legitimate expectation, there was a sufficient overriding public interest to justify the Agency's departure from its previous practice, and its decision to resile from its previous position was not so unfair as to be an abuse of power. A legitimate expectation, even if arising from ultra vires acts by a public authority, could constitute a possession for the purposes of Sch.1 Part II Art.1 of the 1998 Act; R's expectation as to the privacy of Hedsor Water was a possession entitled to protection unless the Agency's interference with it was justified and proportionate. Such interference was lawful, pursued a legitimate aim and was proportionate. However, in exercising its public functions in respect of Hedsor Water, the Agency had to take into account the common assumption prior to November 2000 that it was private.