### Summary

Provided that the police complied with the underlying principle of [ECHR art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=38545d7c5aec4efaaca6ba7bc9c93f46&contextData=(sc.Default)), namely to protect the individual from arbitrariness, the lawful detention of a person outside the context of criminal proceedings could, as a matter of principle, be permissible under [art.5(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=38545d7c5aec4efaaca6ba7bc9c93f46&contextData=(sc.Default)). In the instant case, the preventive detention at the time of an international football match of three individuals suspected of hooliganism had been lawful.

### Abstract

The applicants complained that their preventive detention had been in breach of [ECHR art.5(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=38545d7c5aec4efaaca6ba7bc9c93f46&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The applicants were Danish football supporters. From 20.00 to 22.00 on 10 October 2009, a football match between Denmark and Sweden was held in Copenhagen. Beforehand, the police had received intelligence reports of intentions among various club factions from Denmark and Sweden to instigate hooligan brawls. Consequently, in addition to the Copenhagen Police, which was in operation as usual, an extra 186 police officers were called on duty. The second and third applicants were detained at 15.50 after a police officer had seen them talking with an activist from a local faction and giving orders to other hooligans from the club which they supported. They were known to the police for having been detained several times previously in connection with similar football events. The first applicant was detained at 16.45 after a man had contacted an officer saying that three people, including the first applicant, were calling various friends and telling them to meet at a particular location to try to start a fight with Swedish supporters. The first applicant had also been detained several times previously in connection with similar events. The applicants were detained under the Police Act (Denmark) s.5(3), which entitled the police to detain a person in order to avert any risk of disturbance of public order or any danger to the safety of individuals or public security. The first applicant was released after seven hours and 21 minutes, the second applicant after seven hours and 37 minutes and the third applicant after seven hours and 44 minutes. On 15 October 2009, the applicants' representative requested that the police bring cases before the courts in order to examine the lawfulness of the detention. The City Court rejected their cases, finding their preventive detention to have been lawful. That decision was upheld on appeal by the High Court. Article 5(1) provided that no one should be deprived of his liberty save "in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law". The "case" set out in [art.5(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=38545d7c5aec4efaaca6ba7bc9c93f46&contextData=(sc.Default)) was as follows: "the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so".

### Held

Complaints dismissed.

**Correct approach to art.5(1)(c)** - It was necessary to clarify and adapt the court's case law under art.5(1)(c) and in particular to accept that the second limb of that provision, namely "when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence", could be seen as a distinct ground for deprivation of liberty, independently of the first limb. Accordingly, provided that the police complied with the underlying principle of art.5, namely to protect the individual from arbitrariness, the lawful detention of a person outside the context of criminal proceedings could, as a matter of principle, be permissible under art.5(1)(c). Although the "purpose" requirement under art.5(1)(c) applied also to deprivation of liberty under its second limb, that requirement should be applied with a degree of flexibility so that the question of compliance would depend on whether the detainee, as required by [art.5(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=38545d7c5aec4efaaca6ba7bc9c93f46&contextData=(sc.Default)), was intended to be brought promptly before a judge to have the lawfulness of his detention reviewed or whether he was to be released before such time. Further, in the event of a failure to comply with the latter requirement, the person concerned should have an enforceable right to compensation in accordance with [art.5(5)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=38545d7c5aec4efaaca6ba7bc9c93f46&contextData=(sc.Default)). In other words, subject to the availability under national law of the safeguards enshrined in art.5(3) and art.5(5), the "purpose" requirement ought not to constitute an obstacle to short-term detention in circumstances such as those at issue in the instant case (see paras 116, 137 of judgment).

**Had the applicants' art.5 rights been breached?** - The conditions for applying a flexible interpretation of the "purpose" requirement were met, and the applicants' detention under s.5(3) of the Police Act fell within the second limb of art.5(1)(c). It therefore had to be determined whether their detention was justified under art.5(1)(c). The answer was yes. Their detention was "lawful" in the sense of conforming to the substantive and procedural rules of national law. Further, it was not arbitrary. It was also "necessary". The domestic courts had struck a fair balance between the importance of the right to liberty and the importance of preventing the applicants from organising and taking part in a hooligan brawl. Their preventive detention complied with art.5(1)(c), with the result that there had been no breach of art.5(1) (paras 141-142, 148-174).