### Summary

Neither compliance with the duty under the [Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 s.8(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8C1D7451E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default)) nor the absence of a realistic prospect of prosecution was a condition precedent to the making by the secretary of state of a non-derogating control order.

### Abstract

The appellant (E) appealed against a decision (_[[2007] EWCA Civ 459, [2007] 3 W.L.R. 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9D42559004EE11DC96BFB734CF640096/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that his rights under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.5](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8241ED61EE3C4D77BE2C280D3AC956DC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default)) were not infringed by the non-derogating control order to which he was subject, and that the control order should not have been quashed as a result of the respondent secretary of state's breach of his duty under the [Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 s.8(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8C1D7451E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default)) to take reasonable steps to ensure that the prosecuting authorities were keeping the prospects of prosecution under review.

The Court of Appeal had found that the secretary of state had breached his continuing duty of review by omitting to provide the police with judgments of the Belgian court in cases in which associates of E were successfully prosecuted, so as to prompt and facilitate a reconsideration of the prospects of prosecuting E.

E submitted that 

(1) the effect of the control order was to deprive him of his liberty; 

(2) it was a fundamental premise of the 2005 Act that where there were realistic prospects of prosecuting an individual against whom it was proposed to make a control order, he would indeed be prosecuted; 

(3) compliance by the secretary of state with his duty under s.8(2) was a condition precedent to his power to make an order in a case falling within [s.8(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8C1D7451E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default)); 

(4) the absence of a realistic prospect of prosecution was a condition precedent to the making by the secretary of state of a non-derogating control order. Thus the secretary of state must not only consult under s.8(2), but must be given to understand that it was not feasible to prosecute with a reasonable prospect of success. Unless that was so, it could not be "necessary" to impose obligations under a control order, since it would not be shown that the public could not be protected by arresting, charging and prosecuting the individual.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) The obligations imposed on E under the control order differed from those imposed in the case of _[Secretary of State for the Home Department v JJ [2007] UKHL 45, [2008] 1 A.C. 385, [2007] 10 WLUK 805](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I57CF5E30883E11DC8800837DEB8FB89A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ in certain material respects. The curfew to which he was subjected was of 12 hours' duration; the residence specified in the order was his own home, where he had lived for some years, and he was also allowed access to his garden; he lived at home with his wife and family; five members of his family lived in the local area and had been approved as visitors; he was not subject to any geographical restriction during non-curfew hours; he was free to attend a mosque of his choice and was not prohibited from associating with named individuals. The Court of Appeal was right to regard E's case as distinguishable from the case of JJ, JJ distinguished. The starting point in any consideration of deprivation of liberty was the core element of confinement. The length of curfew in E's case was within the range which Strasbourg had accepted as merely restricting liberty. 

(2) There could be no doubt about the governing principle behind the 2005 Act nor about its importance. It was implicit that if there was evidence that justified the bringing of a criminal charge, a suspect would be prosecuted rather than made the subject of a control order, _[Secretary of State for the Home Department v MB [2006] EWCA Civ 1140, [2007] Q.B. 415, [2006] 8 WLUK 11](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8A7FA7A0237111DBA1BE83A3E64D3789/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The secretary of state accepted that premise. 

(3) [Section 2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8C1B5170E45311DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=b677b301811746f6963d180d0d268cb8&contextData=(sc.Default)) prescribed the circumstances in which the secretary of state could make a non-derogating control order, and compliance with the s.8(2) duty was not included as a qualifying condition. However, it was true that s.8(2) was expressed in strong mandatory terms. The duty under s.8(2) was to be taken seriously. 

(4) The absence of a realistic prospect of prosecution was not a condition precedent to the making by the secretary of state of a non-derogating control order. Section 2(1) of the Act did not include that element as a qualifying condition. To require the secretary of state not only to consult on whether there was a realistic prospect of prosecution but to obtain a clear answer would emasculate what was clearly intended to be an effective procedure and could not be taken to represent the intention of Parliament. 

(5) Once it was accepted that there was a continuing duty to review, the correct approach was for the secretary of state to do what he reasonably could do to ensure that the continuing review was meaningful, and to provide the police with material in his possession that was or might be relevant to any reconsideration of prosecution. It was regrettable that the Belgian judgments were not made available promptly to the appropriate authorities. However, the Court of Appeal's reasoning on the effect of the secretary of state's breach of duty could not be faulted. The Court of Appeal was correct to hold that the control order should not have been quashed.