### Summary

A judge had erred in concluding that policy DP 5/96, which contained a general presumption against the removal of immigrants where their children had accumulated seven years continuous residence, continued to apply to families whose children had been in the United Kingdom for seven years or more before the policy was withdrawn. The judge had failed to take into account the right of the Secretary of State for the Home Department to withdraw the policy on the grounds that it was contrary to the public interest.

### Abstract

The appellant secretary of state appealed against a decision (_[[2010] EWHC 2894 (Admin)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF00CA7E0F11611DFACFBF047D151A08B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c6b6f548cf3846bca6e822cbfd92cf68&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that her refusal to grant the respondent (R) and his family leave to remain was unlawful.

R, his wife and two children had arrived in the United Kingdom in 2001 on a visitor's visa, which expired five months later. They continued to reside in the UK and in 2009 applied for indefinite leave to remain under the terms of policy DP 5/96. That policy, which contained a general presumption against the removal of immigrants where their children had accumulated seven or more continuous years residence in the UK, had been withdrawn in 2008 after the secretary of state decided that it was contrary to the public interest, save in relation to applications made or removals ordered before its withdrawal. R and his family had completed their seven-year stay about three months before the withdrawal of the policy, but its withdrawal had taken place eight months before R made his application. The application was refused. The judge concluded that not to afford R and his family the benefit of DP 5/96 when they had accrued the necessary seven years' residence prior to the withdrawal of the policy was so conspicuously unfair as to amount to an abuse of power.

R submitted that the withdrawal of the policy was unlawful because it was made without any prior notice or consultation. The secretary of state submitted that R had had no legitimate expectation that DP 5/96 would apply. She further submitted that the judge had failed to take properly into account her right to decide whether a policy was in the public interest and the fact that R had evaded immigration control.

### Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The circumstances in which the courts would imply a duty to consult, where no expectation of consultation had been created by express or implied promise or practice, were narrow, _[R. (on the application of BAPIO Action Ltd) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1139, [2008] A.C.D. 7, [2007] 11 WLUK 228](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9A89FE508F5111DC9C26E9F078BBCACB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c6b6f548cf3846bca6e822cbfd92cf68&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Further, it would be wholly unreasonable to impose a duty to consult those whose presence in the UK was at best irregular, and at worst had been secured by deception. Accordingly, the secretary of state had not been bound to carry out any consultation before revoking the policy, nor was there a duty to give advance notice of the revocation (see paras [40-41](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) R had not known of the seven-year child concession policy before its withdrawal. He could not therefore show that he relied on it. It followed that the real questions were whether the secretary of state had acted lawfully in withdrawing the policy and in determining the transitional provisions that would apply. It was clear that she had. The policy was an invitation to parents whose immigration status was irregular not to seek to regularise their status, but to lie low until their children had been in the UK for seven years. It could operate as an inducement to enter the country fraudulently, with limited leave, and then to remain until the seven years had expired. The secretary of state was entitled to take the view that the policy was inimical to her immigration policy. A minister was entitled to review, change and revoke his policy whenever he considered it to be in the public interest to do so. Accordingly, the secretary of state's decision to withdraw the policy was not irrational. Nor did she fail to take into account the interest of the children of those seeking to remain; their interests, as well as their parents, were adequately addressed by the provisions of the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38C9C0AD773A4385868CB431E132B1A7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c6b6f548cf3846bca6e822cbfd92cf68&contextData=(sc.Default)), in particular [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c6b6f548cf3846bca6e822cbfd92cf68&contextData=(sc.Default)) (para.[43](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). There was also no basis for impugning the transitional provisions; they required the policy to continue to be applied to those whose cases were considered when the policy was in force, so that they could contend that the proper application of the policy should have led the secretary of state to decide not to remove them and/or to grant them leave to remain. There was a perfectly rational distinction between those cases and cases such as R's, in which the policy did not fall to be applied while it was in force (para.[44](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Furthermore, any reliance on the expectation that the policy would be applied would not have been legitimate in the sense of giving rise to any rights in public law. R had failed to regularise his family's immigration status after the expiration of his leave and that evasion or avoidance of immigration rules disqualified him from establishing any legitimate expectation. The judge had failed to take account of the irregular immigration status of R and his family or the interests of the UK in maintaining a rational and effective system of immigration control (paras [45-46](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).