In Tameside, the Education Secretary halted the reintroduction of grammar schools, which had been proposed by the newly elected local authority. He had believed that the re-introduction would lead to educational chaos and undue disruption for children. The House of Lords concluded that the Secretary of State had either misunderstood or was not informed as to the nature and effect of the professional educational advice available to the local education authority and had wrongly jumped to conclusions. This case has also been seen to represent a no evidence for a fact error on the part of the Secretary of State.

---

A local education authority has freedom of choice in deciding how to carry out its statutory obligation to provide secondary education facilities and provided that it acts reasonably the Secretary of State has no power to intervene. The Secretary of State approved a scheme proposed by the Tameside local education authority to adopt a system of comprehensive education for all schools under the authority's control, it being anticipated that the scheme would be implemented with effect from September 1976. In the local government elections held in May 1976 the Conservative party, then in opposition, gave great emphasis in its election campaign to its intention to reconsider such proposals if elected. As a result of the election the Conservative party gained control of the council and thereafter announced their intention to maintain the "status quo," in that the building of certain new comprehensive schools was to continue but that existing grammar schools would continue as such, pupils being selected according to ability, the selection being made with the assistance of school reports and interviews; 783 applications were received for the 240 available places. In June 1976 the authority informed the Secretary of State of their proposals stating that the new buildings would not be complete and that implementation of the original scheme would gravely disrupt students' studies. The Secretary of State thereupon directed the authority to implement the originally approved scheme and successfully sought an order of mandamus compelling the authority's compliance, the Divisional Court placing reliance upon the possible difficulties in carrying out in time the selection procedure. The Court of Appeal having heard evidence that the selection process was viable allowed the authority's appeal.

Held, dismissing the appeal by the Secretary of State, that the Secretary of State could interfere under the [Education Act 1944 s.68](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I493FFF00E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8c98f7980ced420db6cc411297779561&contextData=(sc.Default)) only if it was shown that the authority was proposing to act unreasonably; it was not sufficient that he disagreed with the authority's proposals; that it had not been shown that the authority were acting unreasonably either in postponing implementation of the original scheme or in adopting the selection procedure proposed. (Decision of C.A. affirmed).