Shaw wanted to publish a directory of prostitutes. He was advised by his lawyers that publication of the directory would not amount to a criminal offence. Nevertheless, a conviction of 'conspiracy to corrupt public morals' was ultimately upheld (even though there was no such statutory offence, and such a conviction was unprecedented).

The House of Lords held that courts had 'residual power to enforce the supreme and fundamental purpose of the law, to conserve not only the safety and order but also the moral welfare of the state'.

---

### Abstract

A conspiracy to corrupt public morals is a crime at common law. A conspiracy to corrupt public morals by publishing advertisements of prostitutes is punishable as such in spite of s.2(4) of the Obscene Publications Act, 1959. A person who publishes such advertisements for gain is also guilty of living on the earnings of prostitution contrary to the Sexual Offences Act 1959 s.30(1). A person may fairly be said to be living in whole or in part on the earnings of prostitution if he is paid by prostitutes for goods or services supplied by him for the purpose of prostitution which he would not supply but for the fact that they were prostitutes. The appellant conspired with others to publish a magazine containing advertisements by prostitutes (for which they paid out of their professional earnings) inviting perverted practices as well as ordinary intercourse, and the appellant sold copies of the magazine.

Held, he was guilty of conspiring to corrupt public morals and of living on the earnings of prostitution. _[R. v Delaval 97 E.R. 913, [1763] 6 WLUK 28](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7F919250E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=411e6fef21f64cca8458f7091386e774&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _R. v Mears and Chalk (1851) 4 Cox C.C. 423, [1851] 1 WLUK 11_ applied; _[R. v Howell 176 E.R. 513, [1864] 1 WLUK 14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5EC76810E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=411e6fef21f64cca8458f7091386e774&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[R. v Berg (Alexander) (1928) 20 Cr. App. R. 38, [1928] 1 WLUK 24](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID0C4BB30E57111DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=411e6fef21f64cca8458f7091386e774&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; and _[R. v Newland (Alfred Ernest) [1954] 1 Q.B. 158, [1953] 10 WLUK 75](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B58EC30E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=411e6fef21f64cca8458f7091386e774&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[R. v Thomas (Andrew Babatunde) [1957] 1 W.L.R. 747, [1957] 4 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6DF7EBC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=411e6fef21f64cca8458f7091386e774&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.