### Abstract

S, G, L and B were administratively discharged from the armed forces on the basis of their homosexuality. The Ministry of Defence applied a blanket policy excluding homosexuals from service in the armed forces. The policy was justified on the basis that to allow homosexuals to serve would have a detrimental effect on morale because of prevailing attitudes towards homosexuality amongst service personnel and a consequent negative effect upon operational effectiveness. Applications for judicial review of the MoD policy were unsuccessful, as was a subsequent appeal. All four applicants appealed to the House of Lords, contending that the investigations undertaken by the MoD, and their subsequent discharge, constituted an infringement of their right to respect for their private lives and discrimination under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=d0340a8de96c49afa792961e0f7f138c&contextData=(sc.Search)) and Art.14 respectively. The applicants further contended that an application for judicial review in the UK did not afford them an effective domestic remedy as required under Art.13.

Held, that 

(1) the investigations, interviews and discharges amounted to an "exceptional intrusion" into the applicants' private lives, constituting a violation of Art.8. The arguments raised by the UK Government were based upon the prejudice demonstrated by heterosexual armed forces personnel towards homosexuals and outlined in the report of the Homosexual Policy Assessment Team. An adverse attitude to homosexuals could not of itself justify the interferences in question any more than it could justify discrimination on the grounds of race or sex. Although no cogent evidence had been supplied to support the contention relating to operational difficulties, the court accepted that some problems might arise but that these could be countered by means of a code of conduct enforced by adequate disciplinary rules, and 

(2) the applicants did not have access to an effective domestic remedy as required by Art.13. The test of irrationality formulated by the domestic courts had been set at such a level that the UK courts were precluded from even considering whether the alleged interference with private lives could be justified on the basis of social need, national security or public order. These were matters which constituted the very essence of the court's considerations under Art.8.