### Summary

The United Kingdom's jurisdiction under the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID974C9D83A194A90B735FDDC6203A5AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default)) extended to securing the protection of [art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default)) to members of the armed forces when they were serving outside its territory.

### Abstract

The court had to determine whether claims brought against the Ministry of Defence by British service personnel injured, and by the families of personnel killed, while serving in Iraq should be struck out.

The first group of claimants (S) were related to servicemen killed in an explosion beside their Land Rover. S alleged that the MoD had breached the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default)) by failing to take reasonable steps to protect the soldiers' lives from foreseeable risks, in relation to the procurement and deployment of appropriately armoured vehicles. The second set of claims concerned servicemen killed and injured in friendly fire between two tanks. The claimants (T) alleged that the MoD had breached its common law duty of care by failing to ensure that the tanks were properly equipped with devices which would have prevented the incident. The court had to determine 

(i) whether the United Kingdom's jurisdiction under [art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID974C9D83A194A90B735FDDC6203A5AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Convention extended to securing the protection of art.2 to members of the armed forces serving outside its territory; 
(ii) if so, whether the art.2 claims should nevertheless be struck out; 
(iii) whether T's claims should be struck out under the doctrine of combat immunity; 
(iv) whether T's claims should be struck out on the basis that it would not be fair, just and reasonable to impose a duty of care to protect against such death or injury as had occurred.

### Held

Judgment accordingly.

(Lords Mance, Wilson and Carnwath JJ.S.C. dissenting in part) 

(1) Following _[Al-Skeini v United Kingdom (55721/07) (2011) 53 E.H.R.R. 18, [2011] 7 WLUK 207](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF1DEA680ADC811E0A275A4111F701EB7/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_, the view taken in _[R. (on the application of Smith) v Oxfordshire Assistant Deputy Coroner [2010] UKSC 29, [2011] 1 A.C. 1, [2010] 6 WLUK 756](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF3E1326084A011DFBB33C75916EA1CCC/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that the state's armed forces abroad were not within its jurisdiction for the purposes of art.1 could no longer be maintained, Al-Skeini applied, Smith not followed. Al-Skeini's statement that "whenever the state through its agents exercises control and authority over an individual, and thus jurisdiction" summarised the circumstances in which the state could be held to exercise jurisdiction extraterritorially. That resolved the inconsistency between _[Issa v Turkey (31821/96) (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 27, [2004] 11 WLUK 443](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICAF82B11E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Bankovic v Belgium (Admissibility) (52207/99) 11 B.H.R.C. 435, [2001] 12 WLUK 302](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFBA8DEA0E4B611DAB61499BEED25CD3B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_, on whether the relevant test was one of authority and control or was essentially territorial, in favour of Issa's indication that the question was one of authority and control. Bankovic could no longer be regarded as authoritative, Issa applied, Bankovic considered. Further, Al-Skeini had departed from Bankovic's indication that the package of rights in the Convention was indivisible and could not be tailored to the circumstances of the extraterritorial act in question. Such dividing and tailoring went with the principle that extraterritorial jurisdiction could exist whenever a state through its agents exercised authority and control over an individual. Further, both a state's agents and those whom they affected when exercising authority and control on the state's behalf were brought within the state's art.1 jurisdiction by the application of the same general principle, _[Cyprus v Turkey (6780/74) (1975) 2 D. & R. 125, [1976] 7 WLUK 62](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I93820480E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Accordingly, the UK's art.1 jurisdiction extended to securing the protection of art.2 to members of the armed forces serving outside its territory (see paras [45-55](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) The extent to which the application of the substantive obligation under art.2 could be held impossible or inappropriate would vary according to context. There was a fundamental difference between training manoeuvres in controlled conditions and active service where troops did not have complete control. Further, although procurement decisions were taken remote from the battlefield, they would not always be appropriate for review by the courts. The court had to avoid imposing unrealistic positive obligations on the state regarding planning and conducting military operations, but it had to give effect to obligations where it was reasonable to expect the protection of art.2, _Stoyanovi v Bulgaria (42980/04) unreported_and _[Giuliani v Italy (23458/02) (2012) 54 E.H.R.R. 10, [2011] 3 WLUK 741](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA87227A03D7F11E18561D2A3A042DC41/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The question required the exercise of judgement on the facts of each case. In T's cases, the circumstances in which the various decisions had been made had to be investigated before any breach of obligations could be determined. Those claims should not be struck out (paras [64-65, 76, 79-81](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(3) The extension of combat immunity in _[Multiple Claimants v Ministry of Defence [2003] EWHC 1134 (QB), Times, May 29, 2003, [2003] 5 WLUK 625](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I79DE2720E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ to the planning and preparation of the operations in which injury was sustained was too loosely expressed, Multiple Claimants disapproved. S's claims were directed to things they said should have been done long before hostilities began. The doctrine of combat immunity should be narrowly construed: to apply it to S's claims would extend it further than it had previously been applied, _[Bici v Ministry of Defence [2004] EWHC 786 (QB), Times, June 11, 2004, [2004] 4 WLUK 176](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7470D4E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved. Nothing suggested that it extended that far (paras [89-96](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). 

(4) The question of whether S's claims fell within the exclusion from the imposition of a duty of care recognised in _[Mulcahy v Ministry of Defence [1996] Q.B. 732, [1996] 2 WLUK 363](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I091F9360E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=db5b17eeeb724428abee9da7129741b9&contextData=(sc.Default))_, or any extension of it, could not be determined without hearing evidence, Mulcahy considered. Whether a duty should be held not to exist depended on the circumstances; the circumstances in which active operations were undertaken varied greatly (para.[98](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).