Soering, a German national, was in the custody of the UK and faced extradition to the USA on a (capital) murder charge. The prosecuting authorities in Virginia made it clear they would seek the death penalty. Soering sought to challenge his extradition on the ground that it would be a breach of the UK’s positive obligation as a Convention state to remove an individual to a jurisdiction where there was a 'real risk' he would suffer treatment contrary to the Convention.

At that time, capital punishment was not yet outlawed under the Convention – it remained one of the recognised exceptions in article 2. Soering could not therefore argue that removal to face possible death in Virginia was a breach of the article 2 positive obligation. Instead, he successfully argued that the manner in which the process of capital punishment was carried out in the USA would violate article 3, as it constituted inhuman or degrading treatment. This was in relation to the very protracted process, where inmates could be stuck on ‘death row’ for many years. This was seen to produce a debilitating psychological condition, the so-called ‘death row phenomenon’.

---

S, a German national who had lived in the United States since he was 11 years old, was accused of murder in US and Germany. The US and German authorities sought extradition of S from the UK to stand trial for the alleged murders which had occurred in the US. Having failed to obtain habeas corpus to prevent his extradition to the US, S applied to ECHR on the ground that the imposition of the death penalty as called for by the prosecutor in his case, which would lead to six to eight years on death row, contravened the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7F7C04FC8E44BEC84CB31238C777298/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=eb358f1267804549827bd1ff7af2ea38&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Convention; that his trial would not be fair in terms of Art.6 and that he would not have any remedy for violations of his rights in the US contrary to Art.13.

Held: If the UK extradited S to the US they would be in contravention of Art.3. The death penalty itself was allowed under certain conditions under Art.2. However, it was the death row phenomenon which S alleged was inhumane and degrading. For any prisoner, any delay between sentence and execution would result in severe stress. As S could be tried for the crime in Germany where there was no death penalty, the legitimate purpose of extradition would be fulfilled. S's complaints regarding breaches of Arts.6 and 13 were ill-founded.