The several applicants had been arrested in different circumstances and each charged with breach of the peace contrary to common law. Under the Magistrates’ Court Act 1980, the court can bind over a Defendant to keep the peace, if the Defendant consents, and impose a sentence of up to 6 months’ imprisonment if the Defendant refuses to consent to a bind over. The procedure is initiated by a complaint, and a bind over order does not constitute a criminal conviction.  

Held: The UK law of Breach of Peace was not so vague as to constitute breach of human rights. It was a breach only where there had been no likelihood of violence from any act and nobody else impeded by otherwise peaceful act of progress. 

> ‘The proceedings brought against the first applicant for breaching the peace also display these characteristics: their deterrent nature is apparent from the way in which a person can be arrested for breach of the peace and subsequently bound over ‘to keep the peace or be of good behaviour’, in which case no penalty will be enforced, and the punitive element derives from the fact that if a person does not agree to be bound over, he will be imprisoned for a period of up to 6 months. . . In these circumstances, the Commission considers the charge of breach of the peace to be a criminal offence and binding over proceedings to be ‘criminal’ in nature, for the purposes of Article 6 of the Convention.’ 

and 
> ”Breach of the peace is not classed as a criminal offence under English law. However, the Court observes that the duty to keep the peace is in the nature of a public duty; the police have powers to arrest any person who has breached the peace or whom they reasonably fear will breach the peace; and the magistrates may commit to prison any person who refuses to be bound over not to breach the peace where there is evidence beyond reasonable doubt that his or her conduct caused or was likely to cause a breach of the peace and that he or she would otherwise cause a breach of the peace in the future. . . . Bearing in mind the nature of the proceedings in question and the penalty at stake, the Court considers that breach of the peace must be regarded as an ‘offence’ within the meaning of Article 5(1)(c)."

Times 01-Oct-1998, 24838/94, (1998) 28 EHRR 603, [1998] ECHR 95, [1998] HRCD 872, 5 BHRC 339, [1998] Crim LR 893