### Summary

The Weights and Measures Act 1985 s.1, which as originally enacted had provided for the continued use of either imperial or metric measures, had not impliedly repealed the European Communities Act 1972 s.2(2) to the extent that the latter empowered the provision of subordinate legislation which was inconsistent with it; the 1972 Act was a constitutional statute which could not be impliedly repealed.

### Abstract

In four appeals the issue before the court concerned the introduction in accordance with the policy of the European Union of compulsory systems of metric weights and measures. In three of the appeals the appellants had been convicted for selling produce using non metric measures. In the fourth appeal the appellant challenged the imposition of conditions on his street trading licence relating to his use of metric weights and measures. By virtue of [Council Directive 80/181 Art.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE711E8B09B6141D4AA00004785004269/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0904e54521d94eb0ab266577044737d2&contextData=(sc.Default)) , as amended by [Council Directive 89/617](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I903AFC6D820344DF85C97FC41ED25BB9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0904e54521d94eb0ab266577044737d2&contextData=(sc.Default)) , together with Chapter IV of the Annex, the continued use of imperial measures for trade in goods loose in bulk was only permitted until December 31, 1999. Prior to the amendment, the [Weights and Measures Act 1985](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I601AD350E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0904e54521d94eb0ab266577044737d2&contextData=(sc.Default)) had permitted the continued use of imperial and metric measures for such goods. The [Units of Measurement Regulations 1994](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I784447E0E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0904e54521d94eb0ab266577044737d2&contextData=(sc.Default)) had amended the 1985 Act so that the use of imperial measures was permitted in relation to such goods as either a primary or a supplementary indicator until January 1, 2000. However, thereafter the use of the pound as a primary indicator of weight was forbidden. The arguments before the court related to the doctrine of implied repeal and, in particular, whether the 1985 Act had impliedly repealed the [European Communities Act 1972 s.2(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I12B30A80E44911DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0904e54521d94eb0ab266577044737d2&contextData=(sc.Default)) to the extent that the latter empowered the provision of subordinate legislation which was inconsistent with it.

Held, dismissing the appeals, that the 1985 Act, as originally enacted, had not impliedly repealed s.2(2) of the 1972 to the extent that the latter empowered the provision of subordinate legislation which was inconsistent with it. The appropriate analysis of the relationship between EC and domestic law required regard to four propositions: 
(1) each specific right and obligation provided under EC law was by virtue of the 1972 Act incorporated into domestic law and took precedence. Anything within domestic law which was inconsistent with EC law was either abrogated or had to be modified so as to avoid inconsistency; 
(2) the 1972 Act was a constitutional statute which could not be impliedly repealed; 
(3) the common law recognised a category of constitutional statutes, and 
(4) the fundamental legal basis of the United Kingdom's relationship with the EU rested with domestic rather than European legal powers. In the instant case, since the amendments to the 1985 Act no longer permitting the use of the pound as a primary indicator had been lawful, the four appeals had to be dismissed.