### Summary

A prisoner was given permission to seek a declaration that the period of appointment and tenure provisions for Parole Board members failed the test of objective independence. It was not acceptable for the Secretary of State for Justice to pressurise the Board's chair to resign because he was dissatisfied with the chair's conduct; that breached the principle of judicial independence.

### Abstract

The claimant prisoner sought permission to apply for judicial review of the Parole Board's independence, and applied for an interim injunction halting the selection process of its new chair.

The claimant had been sentenced to an indeterminate custodial sentence for public protection and had served the minimum term. His detention was periodically reviewed by the Board to determine his suitability for release. In March 2018 the Board's chair resigned following a meeting with the defendant secretary of state, in the wake of the controversy set out in _[R. (on the application of DSD) v Parole Board for England and Wales [2018] EWHC 694 (Admin), [2019] Q.B. 285, [2018] 3 WLUK 689](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D9C2D80327D11E896509A1B86CD28C2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=630032614cd34608a9dddd41b453144f&contextData=(sc.Default))_. In his resignation letter, the chair said that the secretary of state had told him that his position was untenable. In a television interview, the secretary of state stated that new leadership was required on the Board. The claimant sought a declaration that he could not receive a fair trial from the Board because it was not an objectively fair adjudicative body. He sought an interim order halting the selection process for the new chair.

The claimant submitted that the Board was not independent because 
(1) it remained sponsored by the Ministry of Justice, which was invariably a party to its proceedings; 
(2) its appointment process was flawed; 
(3) the secretary of state had the power to give it directions; 
(4) its members' tenure, once appointed, was too short and precarious.

### Held

Permission granted in part, application refused.

**Sponsorship -** Sponsorship by the Ministry of Justice did not of itself impugn the Board's independence, _[R. (on the application of Brooke) v Parole Board for England and Wales [2008] EWCA Civ 29, [2008] 1 W.L.R. 1950, [2008] 2 WLUK 3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I09967960D47911DCB052B42368B74575/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=630032614cd34608a9dddd41b453144f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The sole concern raised in Brooke had been the Board's link with the National Offender Management Service. There was no longer such a link, so it could not be re-argued that by virtue of sponsorship alone the Board was not independent (see para.[8](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Appointment process -** Under the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 Sch.19](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDACCFF90E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=630032614cd34608a9dddd41b453144f&contextData=(sc.Default)), the secretary of state appointed the members, following applications on paper and interviews by an advisory assessment panel. The secretary of state was given a choice of candidates, and candidates could be required to attend the House of Commons Justice Select Committee. The process was abundantly fair and impartial and was consistent with objective independence, _[R. (on the application of Brooke) v Parole Board for England and Wales [2007] EWHC 2036 (Admin), [2007] H.R.L.R. 46, [2007] 9 WLUK 81](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4F3EEFF0673311DC9280C8956ECF36C5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=630032614cd34608a9dddd41b453144f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [9-10](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Directions from the secretary of state -**Section 239(6) of the Act gave the secretary of state the power to give the Board directions on what to take into account in discharging its functions. Such directions were legitimate provided they were legally relevant, Brooke (2008) followed. The secretary of state was entitled to seek the Board's advice, in which case the Board had a duty to give advice. The Board was then acting as an advisor; it was not an independent court (para.[11](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Tenure -** In Brooke (2007) the court had held that the relatively short term of appointment, namely three years renewable for three years, coupled with the secretary of state's power to remove a member where satisfied that they had failed satisfactorily to perform their duties, with no procedure for review of the merits of that decision, meant that for that reason alone the tenure provisions failed the objective independence test, Brooke (2007) considered. The terms of appointment had not changed, although there were plans for new, similar terms to be put in place. Even in the new terms there was no formal machinery in place for the merits of a removal decision to be challenged in an independent and impartial forum. The only recourse would be for an aggrieved member to commence judicial review proceedings. The power of discharge under the new proposed terms was virtually the same as before, and the tenure provisions continued to fail the test of objective independence. A reasonable observer could conclude that the short term of appointment, coupled with the precarious tenure, might wrongly influence a decision that had to be made. In the television interview, the secretary of state had implicitly accepted that he had "effectively sacked" the Board's chair. The chair had significant judicial functions, and all Board members were members of a quasi-judicial body requiring complete objective independence. It was not acceptable for the secretary of state to pressurise the chair to resign because he was dissatisfied with the chair's conduct; that breached the principle of judicial independence. If the secretary of state considered that the chair should be removed, he should take formal steps to remove him. The claimant was granted permission to seek a declaration that the period of appointment and tenure provisions failed the test of objective independence (paras [15-21, 26-27, 31-32](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Interim relief -** The current competition to select a chair did not have to be halted. If the claimant obtained the declaration sought, further changes would be required to the terms of appointment of members, to provide for a fully independent and impartial review to examine the merits of a removal. That would be made available to existing and future members. The balance of convenience did not favour a disruptive remedy (paras [34-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).