### Summary

Where Scottish ministers took responsibility for the construction of a city bypass, and revised the scheme to include an extra link of road, that revision was a modification to a “project” within the scope of [Directive 85/337](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB1C31E8223C24B11B458CD3532F191CA/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)), not a modification to a “plan” or “programme” for the purposes of [Directive 2001/42](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0472C1BFA5B484CBE79F6019623D35E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)). The court clarified the law relating to an individual's standing to challenge administrative decisions concerning the environment.

### Abstract

The appellant (W), an individual protestor, appealed against a decision (_[[2012] CSIH 19](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I15400B5064C111E1BD61DCB4C3D7B35F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search))_) that orders made by the respondent Scottish Ministers to allow the construction of a road network were valid, and that, in any event, he had no standing to bring a challenge.

The ministers had approved and published proposals for a "western peripheral route" around Aberdeen. Because of opposition to part of the proposed route, previously discarded options were re-examined. The route was revised to include an extra link of road (the fastlink), which was effectively a hybrid of two options which had been considered at the consultation stage. The draft scheme, together with an environmental impact assessment, was published. At a public local inquiry, it was argued that the ministers had not complied with the requirements of [Directive 2001/42](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0472C1BFA5B484CBE79F6019623D35E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)) in relation to the fastlink. The ministers found the complaint to be outside the remit of the inquiry. The scheme was challenged in the courts by W. His submissions were rejected, the Extra Division also holding that he was not a "person aggrieved" within the [Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 Sch.2 para.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7028B600E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)) because he was not directly impacted. The issues were (i) whether the fastlink had been adopted in violation of Directive 2001/42; (ii) whether, even if such a failure was established, W should be denied a remedy; (iii) whether W had standing to make his challenge.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) Directive 2001/42 and [Directive 85/337](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB1C31E8223C24B11B458CD3532F191CA/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)) were designed to provide a high level of protection for the environment. Both imposed a requirement to perform an environmental assessment, but they were different in scope; the latter concerned assessment of the effects of "projects" on the environment, whereas the former concerned the environmental assessment of "plans and programmes". The question whether an assessment under Directive 2001/42 was required depended on whether the decision to construct the fastlink as part of the peripheral route was a modification of a "plan" or "programme" as defined in [art.2(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0472C1BFA5B484CBE79F6019623D35E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)) and was therefore itself such a plan or programme. Assuming that the local transport strategies comprised such a "plan" or "programme", the fastlink did not amount to a modification. After the proposal for a new road had been made, the ministers, as the authority responsible for trunk roads, had adopted responsibility for its design and construction. They had therefore assumed responsibility for a specific development which was better described as a "project" within Directive 85/337 than as a "plan" or "programme" within Directive 2001/42. Their decision to incorporate the fastlink was a modification to a project, not a modification to the legal or administrative framework which had been set for future development consent of projects. Directive 2001/42 was not therefore applicable, _[Inter-Environnement Bruxelles ASBL v Region de Bruxelles-Capitale (C-567/10) EU:C:2012:159, [2012] 2 C.M.L.R. 30, [2012] 3 WLUK 731](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6318C240B41711E1A05080113C707E5C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered (see paras [10-16, 59-62, 64-71, 149-150](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). 

(2) Issues concerning remedy required fuller consideration. The matter was not straightforward (paras [77-81, 108-114](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (3) (Obiter) Whether somebody was a “person aggrieved” depended on the particular legislation involved and the nature of the complaint made, _[Sidebotham, Ex p. (1880) 14 Ch. D. 458, [1880] 5 WLUK 47](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA83FA8E0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search)), [Arsenal Football Club Ltd v Smith (Valuation Officer) [1979] A.C. 1, [1977] 4 WLUK 123](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I676AF050E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[Lardner v Renfrewshire DC 1997 S.C. 104, [1997] 2 WLUK 237](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7530291E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered. 

A wide interpretation was appropriate, particularly in the context of statutory planning appeals; the quality of the natural environment was of legitimate concern to everyone. A person would ordinarily be regarded as aggrieved if they made objections or representations as part of the procedure which preceded the decision challenged, and if their complaint was that the decision was not properly made. 

W was a “person aggrieved”. He had made representations to the ministers in accordance with the procedures laid down in the 1984 Act; he had taken part in the local inquiry; he lived in the vicinity of the peripheral road, and was an active member of various local environmental organisations. As a participant in the procedure, he was entitled to be concerned about a perceived failure to follow a fair procedure (paras [83-88, 103, 151-156](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). He would also have had standing, as a party with sufficient interest, to raise common law proceedings for judicial review, but such proceedings would have failed on their merits, _[AXA General Insurance Ltd, Petitioners [2011] UKSC 46, [2012] 1 A.C. 868, [2011] 10 WLUK 287](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE9F0D590F52311E0A088D8E99B615587/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ba9840310b654dc485e3edc4dbc0cb61&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered (paras [90-97](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).