### Abstract

It is a paramount principle that the rights of the citizen to have recourse to the courts are not to be excluded except by clear words, and the [Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.53](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I94D860C0E4AB11DA9407CBB86AE37856/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2c791510cc5e457ab3f5c12fce30f901&contextData=(sc.Default)) does not prevent a private citizen challenging the actions of a housing authority by way of defence to an ordinary civil claim. 

Per curiam

It would be a very strange use of language to describe the defendant's behaviour in relation to proceedings brought against him as an abuse or misuse of the process of the court for he did not select the procedure to be adopted and was merely seeking to defend the present proceedings on the ground that he was not liable for the whole sum claimed. 

Moreover, he put his defence forward as a matter of right, whereas in an application for judicial review, success would require an exercise of the court's discretion in his favour. D occupied a council let flat. By two resolutions, in 1981 and 1982, the Council resolved to increase rents, under their [Housing Act 1957](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA544376057E711E38749A5862761D480/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2c791510cc5e457ab3f5c12fce30f901&contextData=(sc.Default)) powers, and served D with the requisite notices. He considered them excessive and refused to pay the increases while paying the original rent. The council brought proceedings in the county court for arrears and possession. By his defence, D contended that the resolutions and notices of increase were ultra vires and void and counterclaimed for a declaration to this effect. The council applied to strike out the defence and counterclaim as an abuse of the process of the court. The registrar refused, but the judge upheld the application, holding that it was an abuse of process and contrary to public policy to challenge the conduct of a public authority other than by application for judicial review under the Rules of the Supreme Court, Ord.53, whether the challenge was brought by initiating an action or defence. The Court of Appeal allowed D's appeal. The council's further appeal was dismissed. It was a paramount principle that the private citizen's right to have recourse to the courts was not to be excluded except by clear words and there was nothing in the Rules of the Supreme Court Ord.53 which could be taken as abolishing the right of the private citizen to challenge the decision of the local authority in the course of defending an action of the present kind, nor did the [Supreme Court Act 1981 s.31](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C55BFB0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2c791510cc5e457ab3f5c12fce30f901&contextData=(sc.Default)) which referred only to an "application" for judicial review have the effect of limiting the defendant's rights sub silentio (dictum of Viscount Simonds in _[Pyx Granite Co Ltd v Ministry of Housing and Local Government [1960] A.C. 260, [1959] 7 WLUK 20](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2E15B410E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2c791510cc5e457ab3f5c12fce30f901&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied; _[O'Reilly v Mackman [1983] 2 A.C. 237, [1982] 11 WLUK 222](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I11E00610E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2c791510cc5e457ab3f5c12fce30f901&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished and _[Cocks v Thanet DC [1983] 2 A.C. 286, [1982] 11 WLUK 223](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89321830E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2c791510cc5e457ab3f5c12fce30f901&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished).