### Summary

In providing care and accommodation for residents placed with it by a local authority, a privately-owned care home was not performing functions of a public nature within the meaning of the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(3)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default)).

### Abstract

The appellant (Y) appealed against a decision (_[[2007] EWCA Civ 26, [2007] 2 W.L.R. 109](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I745E0340B10611DBB702B27C7F897130/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that a private care home was not performing the functions of a public authority under the [Human Rights Act 1998 s.6(3)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2B278DA1E45011DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default)) when providing her with care and accommodation.

Y was a resident of a care home run by a healthcare company (S). Her placement had been arranged by the respondent local authority pursuant to its duties under the [National Assistance Act 1948 s.21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5344D891E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default)). The local authority funded the placement in large part, a top-up fee being paid by Y's family and a nursing-care element being funded by the NHS. Following allegations about the conduct of Y's family during visits, S had proposed to transfer Y to a different home. In response she had invoked s.6(3)(b) of the 1998 Act and the [European Convention on Human Rights 1950 Art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default)). The issue was whether a privately-owned care home, when providing care to a resident pursuant to agreements made with a local authority under s.21 and [s.26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I53635D10E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1948 Act, was performing functions of a public nature for the purposes of s.6(3)(b) of the 1998 Act and was thus a public authority obliged to act compatibly with Convention rights.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(Lord Bingham and Baroness Hale dissenting) S was not exercising functions of a public nature within the meaning of s.6(3)(b) of the 1998 Act. The rationale of the section was to ensure that those bodies for whose acts the state was answerable before the European Court of Human Rights should be subject to a domestic law obligation not to act incompatibly with Convention rights. The state could in some circumstances remain responsible for the conduct of a private law body to which it had delegated state powers, but the mere possession of special powers conferred by Parliament did not of itself mean that a body had functions of a public nature; equally, there could be bodies without special statutory powers amenable to judicial review. It was necessary to look at the context in which, and the basis on which, a contractor acted, and in every case the ultimate focus had to be on the nature of the functions being undertaken, _[Aston Cantlow and Wilmcote with Billesley Parochial Church Council v Wallbank [2003] UKHL 37, [2004] 1 A.C. 546, [2003] 6 WLUK 664](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I685A8070E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Y had been placed with S pursuant to the local authority's duties under s.21 of the 1998 Act, and the legislation distinguished clearly between a local authority with a statutory duty to arrange care and accommodation and a private company providing services with which the local authority contracted on a commercial basis in order to fulfil its duty. The actual provision, as opposed to the arrangement, of care and accommodation for those unable to arrange it themselves was not an inherently governmental function. The duty under s.21 was a safety net, conditional on care and attention not being otherwise available. If a person had sufficient capital and could arrange care and accommodation themselves then the local authority would not be involved further, and there was no basis for suggesting that a private care home could somehow be exercising functions of a public nature in relation to those who funded themselves. In providing care and accommodation, S acted as a private, profit-making company, and that motivation pointed against treating it as a body with functions of a public nature. A private care home provided services for its residents that did not, and should not, depend in their nature or quality on the person with whom it contracted to provide such services, and any submission leading to the conclusion that those who funded themselves had less legal protection than those placed in the home by the local authority was inherently questionable. Though their contractual arrangements differed, it was not to such an extent that publicly funded residents needed additional protection, and care homes had to treat privately and publicly funded residents with equality, _[R. v Servite Houses Ex p. Goldsmith (2001) 33 H.L.R. 35, [2000] 5 WLUK 327](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I695DF140E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. (on the application of A) v Partnerships in Care Ltd [2002] EWHC 529 (Admin), [2002] 1 W.L.R. 2610, [2002] 4 WLUK 121](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I74D82CC0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. (on the application of Beer (t/a Hammer Trout Farm)) v Hampshire Farmers Markets Ltd [2003] EWCA Civ 1056, [2004] 1 W.L.R. 233, [2003] 7 WLUK 553](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I75305EE0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c780ca4eff8e4702b0ff1631c77272e0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.