### Summary

The Secretary of State had been entitled to place on the United Nations' Consolidated List of members of Al-Qaida and its associates, the name of an Egyptian national resident in the UK on the basis that there were reasonable grounds to suspect that he met the criteria for such designation.

### Abstract

The appellant (Y) appealed against a decision (_[[2013] EWCA Crim 1302, [2014] 2 W.L.R. 1082](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I77B5E2D040F911E393C2C99970527EB4/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9e8909ebf93e4657b81c43c690b54740&contextData=(sc.Default))_) upholding the refusal of his claim for judicial review of the secretary of state's decision to allow him to be added to a list of persons subject to sanctions under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1617.

The Resolution required UN member states to freeze the assets of those named on the Consolidated List of members of Al-Qaida and its associates. The relevant UN committee was asked to add Y, an Egyptian national resident in the UK, to the list. The secretary of state placed a hold on Y's designation so that the UK could consider whether he met the criteria for designation. The United Nations Ombudsperson recommended that Y be listed on account of his expressed support for Al-Qaida. The secretary of state subsequently accepted that Y met the criteria and released the hold. The Court of Appeal held that the secretary of state had acted conformably with the Consolidated List regime.

Y submitted that (1) his designation had been recommended based on evidence obtained by torture in Egypt and the secretary of state was obliged not to act on torture-tainted evidence; (2) there was no clear statutory provision or common law rule entitling the committee to interfere with his right to peaceful enjoyment of property; (3) the secretary of state had applied too low a standard of proof; (4) the standard of review applicable to the secretary of state's decision was review on the merits, or at least one involving a proportionality analysis.

### Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) The source of the secretary of state's powers under domestic law lay in the exercise of prerogative powers for the conduct of foreign relations. That did not make his decision immune from judicial review, but it was an area in which the courts had to proceed with caution. The decision challenged was the secretary of state's, not the committee's, and it was by reference to his reasons that it had to be judged. There was no legal basis for attributing to him reasons which he did not have. Since his reasons were untainted, Y had to demonstrate that the secretary of state was in breach of a distinct duty to inquire into the reasons of the other members, and to withhold his support if they appeared tainted. There was no doubt about the importance of the rules against torture and the use of torture-tainted evidence, and the duty of states to take the necessary measures "within their municipal legal systems" to give full effect to those rules. However, they did not suggest or imply any duty on states to inquire into the possible reliance on such evidence by other states, whether on their own or as part of an international organisation such as the committee (see paras [24, 27, 29](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) The interference with Y's rights was directly and specifically authorised by [Regulation 881/2002](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE54AB3B719D14D69A59BCB06369993F5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9e8909ebf93e4657b81c43c690b54740&contextData=(sc.Default)), effected by the [European Communities Act 1972](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I605B37B1E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9e8909ebf93e4657b81c43c690b54740&contextData=(sc.Default)). The Regulation was open to challenge, but only in the European court. The Regulation, taken together with the Act, provided ample statutory authority to satisfy the principle that interference by the state could not be justified by the exercise of prerogative powers unsupported by specific statutory authority, _Entick v Carrington (1795) 19 St. Tr. 1029, [1795] 1 WLUK 3_ considered. The secretary of state's exercise of the prerogative power had involved no breach of any common law principle (para.[34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) The position of a decision-maker trying to assess risk in advance was very different from that of a decision-maker trying to determine whether someone had actually done something wrong. Risk could not simply be assessed on a balance of probabilities; it involved a question of degree. The Court of Appeal had rightly attached weight to the Financial Action Task Force's Special Recommendation which referred to the "preventative" purpose of designation and the requirement to freeze terrorist-related funds on "reasonable grounds, or a reasonable basis, to suspect or believe" that they could be used to finance terrorist activity. That was similar in substance to the language used in the Ombudsperson's report, which rejected a test based on probabilities and proposed the standard "whether there is sufficient information to provide a reasonable and credible basis for the listing". The report saw that as recognising "a lower threshold appropriate to preventative measures" while setting a "sufficient level of protection for the rights of individuals". As a member of the committee, the secretary of state had been entitled to, and would be expected to, apply the same approach as the committee as a whole (para.[50](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) While there was a measure of support for the use of proportionality as a test in relation to interference with fundamental rights, the application of such a test was unlikely to lead to a different result from traditional grounds of judicial review. That was particularly true in cases concerning national security. The Security Council had entrusted to the UN member states the task of determining whether the listing criteria were fulfilled. To enable a domestic court to substitute its own assessment of those matters would be inconsistent (paras [56-57](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(5) Even if Y had been entitled to some relief, the court would have been very hesitant to grant it in the light of the unrefuted allegations concerning Y's strong support for Al-Qaida and its objectives, which stood uneasily with his denial of any involvement in terrorism (para.[61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).