---
aliases: 
tags: 
title: Duty to act within powers
date created: Tuesday, July 12th 2022, 10:14:58 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:07 am
---

# Duty to Act Within Powers

```ad-statute
title: s 171
A director of a company must—
- (a) act in accordance with the company’s constitution, and
- (b) only exercise powers for the purposes for which they are conferred.
```

Details:

1. Act in accordance with the company’s constitution
	- The company's constitution is defined in [s 257 CA 2006](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/46/section/257) and includes everything set out in the company's articles of association (s 17) and decisions taken in accordance with the articles (i.e., shareholder resolutions).
	- A director is in breach of this duty if he acts without authority, e.g. commits the company to borrow more than the articles allow without prior shareholder approval.
2. Only exercise powers for the purposes for which they are conferred.
	- Directors should exercise their powers “bona fide in what they consider–not what a court may consider–is in the interests of the company, and not for any collateral purpose.” ([[Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd. [1942] Ch 304]]). This duty codified the **'proper purposes' doctrine**.

## Proper Purposes Doctrine

Outlined in relevant case law:

- [[Hogg v Cramphorn [1967] Ch 254]]: whether purpose of a new share issue was malicious
- [[Howard Smith Ltd v Ampol Petroleum Ltd [1974] AC 821]]:
	- If directors exercise their powers for several purposes, then courts will only consider the dominant purpose.
	- If the dominant purpose is proper, even if the other purposes are improper, there will be no breach of duty.
	- The courts ascertain objective the purpose for which the power was conferred.
- [[Eclairs Group Ltd v JKX Oil & Gas plc [2015] UKSC 71]]: powers of directors to issue disclosure notice.
- [[Extrasure Travel Insurances Ltd v Scattergood [2003] 1 BCLC 598]]: the test of improper purpose is an objective one. See this case for a nice staged test.
- [[Teck Corporation v Millar (1972) 33 DLR (3d) 288]]: good faith vs proper purposes doctrine

Note the overlap between the duty to promote the success of the company (s 172) and the proper purposes doctrine (s 171). The proper purposes doctrine operates to limit the authority of directors even if their action was carried out in what they bona fide believed to be the best interests of the company. If the power is exercised primarily for some collateral purpose (construed objectively), then the action may be set aside.
