---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:20 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:07 am
---

# s 176 CA 2006

## S 176

> [!statute] s 176 - Duty not to accept benefits from third parties
> 
> (1) A director of a company must not accept a benefit from a third party conferred by reason of—
> - (a) his being a director, or
> - (b) his doing (or not doing) anything as director.
> 
> (2) A “third party” means a person other than the company, an associated body corporate or a person acting on behalf of the company or an associated body corporate.
> 
> (3) Benefits received by a director from a person by whom his services (as a director or otherwise) are provided to the company are not regarded as conferred by a third party.
> 
> (4) This duty is not infringed if the acceptance of the benefit cannot reasonably be regarded as likely to give rise to a conflict of interest.
> 
> (5) Any reference in this section to a conflict of interest includes a conflict of interest and duty and a conflict of duties.

## Interpretation

This duty replaces the equitable principle that fiduciaries must not accept secret commissions or bribes ([[Attorney General for Hong Kong v Reid [1994] 1 AC 324]]). Should be read in conjunction with wider no-conflict duty in [[s 175 CA 2006]].

s 176(4) states that duty is not infringed if acceptance of the benefit cannot reasonably be regarded as likely to give rise to a conflict of interest. “Benefits” construed in the ordinary meaning of the word. No provision for authorisation by the board here; ratification would need to be sought by shareholders under s 239 CA 2006.

Note that in general, this duty is construed widely, since the old interpretation was driven by bribes.

Note that this duty is absolute and there is **no** provision for authorisation by the board of directors for such a breach.
