---
aliases: 
tags: 
title: Duty to promote the success of the company
date created: Tuesday, July 12th 2022, 10:14:58 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:07 am
---

# Duty to Promote the Success of the Company

Success = long-term increase in company's value.

```ad-statute
title: s 172 - Duty to promote the success of the company

(1) A director of a company must act in the way he considers, in good faith, would be most likely to promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a whole, and in doing so have regard (amongst other matters) to—
- (a) the likely consequences of any decision in the long term,
- (b) the interests of the company's employees,
- (c) the need to foster the company's business relationships with suppliers, customers and others,
- (d) the impact of the company's operations on the community and the environment,
- (e) the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high standards of business conduct, and
- (f) the need to act fairly as between members of the company.

(2) Where or to the extent that the purposes of the company consist of or include purposes other than the benefit of its members, subsection (1) has effect as if the reference to promoting the success of the company for the benefit of its members were to achieving those purposes.

(3) The duty imposed by this section has effect subject to any enactment or rule of law requiring directors, in certain circumstances, to consider or act in the interests of creditors of the company.
```

## Interpretation

Codifies the long-settled duty of a director to act honestly and in good faith, in the best interests of the company.

Lord Greene MR in [[Re Smith and Fawcett Ltd. [1942] Ch 304]], who stated that

>“[Directors] must exercise their discretion *bona fide* in what they consider—not what a court may consider—is in the interests of the company”.

Similarly, in [[Regentcrest v Cohen [2001] 2 BCLC 80]] it was held that the question for the court was not whether a director's actions were objectively in the best interests of the company, but whether **subjectively** the director honestly believed they were acting in the best interests of the company.

Although the test is **subjective**, the determination of whether a director has complied with s 172 will involve an element of objectivity.

Pennycuick J in [[Charterbridge Corpn Ltd v Lloyd's Bank Ltd (1970)]] stated that the test for determining this duty is

>“whether an intelligent and honest man in the position of a director of the company concerned, could, in the whole of the existing circumstances, have reasonably believed that the transactions were for the benefit of the company.”

In [[Re Southern Counties Fresh Food Ltd (2009)]], Warren J stated that

>“it is accepted that a breach will have occurred if it is established that the relevant exercise of power is one which could not be considered by any reasonable director to be in the interests of the company”.

In [[Madoff Securities International Ltd v Raven & Others [2013] EWHC 3147]], it was stated that a director may legitimately defer to his fellow directors’ views if he thinks they believe they are acting in the best interests of the company, even if he is not himself in agreement.

This test, in practice, makes it very difficult to challenge directors’ decision-making.

The approach requires directors to recognise that shareholder value for the company depends on successful management of relationship with other stakeholders. **Two factors**: directors' good faith and interests of company.

'Success' is defined as long term increase in value (s 172(1)(a)) and takes into account the effect of the directors' decision-making on the members as a whole and the other stakeholders.

## Duty to Creditors

Where a company is insolvent, duty extends to directors acting in the best interests of creditors:

- [[Item Software (UK) Ltd v Fassihi [2004] EWCA Civ 1244]]: in this case it was held that the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company includes the duty to **disclose misconduct** by the director to the company.
- [[Re HLC Environmental Projects Ltd [2013] EWHC 2876 Ch]]: the court held that a director who **prefers one creditor to another** by deliberately paying one over the others (here a bank whose debt was guaranteed by the parent company, so as to assist the parent company) may be in breach of the duty to act in the interests of the creditors as a whole.

N.B. if this seems confusing, get even more confused by [an acadmic opinion](https://usir.salford.ac.uk/id/eprint/3112/1/CA_2006.pdf).
