---
aliases: 
tags: 
title: s 177 CA 2006
date created: Tuesday, July 12th 2022, 10:14:58 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:07 am
---

# S 177 CA 2006

> [!statute] s 177 CA 2006
> (1) If a director is in any way, directly or indirectly, interested in a proposed transaction or arrangement with the company, he must declare the nature and extent of that interest to the other directors.
> 
> (2) The declaration may (but need not) be made—
> - (a) at a meeting of the directors, or
> - (b) by notice to the directors in accordance with—
> 	- (i) section 184 (notice in writing), or
> 	- (ii) section 185 (general notice).
> 
> (3) If a declaration of interest under this section proves to be, or becomes, inaccurate or incomplete, a further declaration must be made.
> 
> (4) Any declaration required by this section must be made before the company enters into the transaction or arrangement.
> 
> (5) This section does not require a declaration of an interest of which the director is not aware or where the director is not aware of the transaction or arrangement in question.
> For this purpose a director is treated as being aware of matters of which he ought reasonably to be aware.
> 
> (6) A director need not declare an interest—
> - (a) if it cannot reasonably be regarded as likely to give rise to a conflict of interest;
> - (b)if, or to the extent that, the other directors are already aware of it (and for this purpose the other directors are treated as aware of anything of which they ought reasonably to be aware); or
> - (c) if, or to the extent that, it concerns terms of his service contract that have been or are to be considered—
> 	- (i) by a meeting of the directors, or
> 	- (ii) by a committee of the directors appointed for the purpose under the company's constitution.

## Details

Disclosure need not be formally in writing ([[Lee Panavision Ltd v Lee Lighting Ltd (1992)]]). Under s 180, if directors comply with duty to disclose, the transaction not liable to be set aside (though this is subject to other provisions in the company's constitution).

The idea of this section is to invite scrutiny of decisions. Even more checks and balances. Note already board authorisation under [[s 175 CA 2006]].

### S 177 Vs S 182

[s 177 CA 2006](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/46/section/177) places a duty on directors to disclose an interest in a **proposed** transaction with the company. [s 182 CA 2006](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/46/section/182) applies to cases where a director has an interest in a transaction **after it has been entered into by the company,** and also requires directors to disclose such interests.

Breach of the duty under s 177 leads to civil consequences under s 178, which are the same as for breach of all the other duties (other than s 174), whereas breach of s 182 leads to criminal sanctions under s 183.

Note that these provisions do not apply to substantial property transactions, loans, quasi-loans and credit transactions which require the approval of the company’s members (ss 190 – 203).
