---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:26 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:24 am
---

# AG's Reference (No 2 of 1983) [1984] QB 456

The defence of lawful object is available to a defendant facing a charge under the [Explosive Substances Act 1883 s.4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1EE98690E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e38fe143d5c4498c9b2357995d8a665a&contextData=(sc.Default)) if he can satisfy a jury on a balance of probabilities that his object was to protect himself, his family or property, against immediate attack, and the measures were reasonably necessary. Per curiam: Although a person may make a petrol bomb with a lawful object, nevertheless if he remains in possession of it after the threat has passed which made his object lawful, it may cease to be so. It will only be very rarely that circumstances will exist where the manufacture or possession of petrol bombs can be for a lawful object. D's property had been attacked and damaged by rioters. He feared further attack and made some petrol bombs which he intended to use only to repulse raiders from his property. He was charged with having made an explosive substance in such circumstances as to give rise to a reasonable suspicion that he had not made it for a lawful object, contrary to the [Explosive Substances Act 1883 s.4(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1EE98690E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e38fe143d5c4498c9b2357995d8a665a&contextData=(sc.Default)) . A prosecution submission that self-defence was not open to D was rejected, and the jury, who were directed to consider the reasonableness of the means adopted for self-defence, acquitted D. The Attorney General referred for the court's opinion whether self-defence was available to such a defendant charged under s.4(1).

Held, that the defence of "lawful object" was available if the defendant could satisfy the jury on a balance of probabilities that his object was to protect himself or his family or property against imminent apprehended attack and to do so by means which he believed were no more than reasonably necessary to meet the force used by the attackers ( _[R. v Fegan (James) [1972] N.I. 80, [1971] 6 WLUK 2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I436F3FC1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e38fe143d5c4498c9b2357995d8a665a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Dicta in _[Palmer (Sigismund) v Queen, The [1971] A.C. 814, [1971] 2 WLUK 81](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I197C4410E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e38fe143d5c4498c9b2357995d8a665a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and in _[Evans v Hughes [1972] 1 W.L.R. 1452, [1972] 7 WLUK 98](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA280F9F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e38fe143d5c4498c9b2357995d8a665a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).
