---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:23 am
---

# DPP v K [1990] 1 WLR 1067

FACTS: K was 15. He splashed some acid on to his hand during a chemistry lesson, and he asked for permission to go and wash his hand because it was sore. He took with him a boiling tube of concentrated acid. He poured some of the acid onto a piece of paper, but hearing footsteps outside, he panicked and poured the rest of the acid into the upturned nozzle of a hot air hand/face drier. The footsteps receded and he re-joined the chemistry lesson intending to return later to deal with the acid in the drier. Another pupil used the drier and the acid was ejected on to his face, causing scarring.

HELD: Although he was acquitted because of a lack of _mens rea_, the Court of Appeal stated that this had satisfied the _actus reus_ of battery.

---

A person who recklessly places a dangerous substance in a machine used by the public is guilty of assault. D, a 15 year old schoolboy, left a chemistry class to wash his hands after spilling sulphuric acid. He took with him a test tube of the acid, and while in the toilet, on hearing footsteps approaching, in a panic poured the fluid into a hot air drier. He returned to class apparently intending to return later to clean out the drier. In the meantime the next user was squirted in the face by the acid and scarred. D was charged with assault under the [Offences Against the Person Act 1861 s.47](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0C0F52C0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=476dd7904bfb4428a4185d0ecc9756bd&contextData=(sc.Default)). The magistrates dismissed the charge on the ground of lack of intention to harm.

Held, allowing the appeal, that D's action in taking the risk that the machine would be used by another before he could render it safe amounted to recklessness, _[R. v Caldwell (James) [1982] A.C. 341, [1981] 3 WLUK 124](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I39951FB0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=476dd7904bfb4428a4185d0ecc9756bd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Lawrence (Stephen Richard) [1982] A.C. 510, [1981] 3 WLUK 137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I51E29700E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=476dd7904bfb4428a4185d0ecc9756bd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.
