---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:22 am
---

# Novoship (UK) Ltd v Mikhaylyuk [2014] EWCA Civ 908

FACTS: The defendant negotiated with the claimant’s agent to charter some ships. As a result of the negotiations, the claimant chartered the ships to the defendant. The terms of the charters were favourable to the claimant.

During the negotiations

- The agent was being paid secret commissions by charterers of the claimant’s other vessels in connection with earlier transactions, and
- the agent was diverting part of those commissions to the defendant.

HELD: The Court of Appeal held that

- the agent’s negotiations with the defendant were a breach of his fiduciary duty to the claimant (because the agent was conflicted)
- the defendant assisted the breach by participating in the negotiations, and
- the defendant’s assistance was dishonest because he was aware of the secret commissions that were being paid to the agent (and, in part, redirected to him).

The defendant successfully exploited the charters and made a profit of $150m.

The issue was whether the claimant was entitled to recover the profit from the defendant. The Court of Appeal concluded that it was not.

The Court of Appeal held (at para 114) that although the defendant’s assistance, i.e., his participation in the negotiations for the charters, was a ‘but for’ cause of the profit, it was not the real or effective cause:

> ‘What Mr Nikitin acquired as a result of his dishonest assistance (and also as a result of Mr Mikhaylyuk’s breach of fiduciary duty) was the use of the vessels at the market rate. That was merely the occasion for him to make a profit. The real or effective cause of the profits was the unexpected change in the market. […] Mr Nikitin made the profits “because he judged the market well.”’

The court also held (at para 119) that it would have been disproportionate to deprive the defendant of the profit given the form and extent of his own wrongdoing.

---

## Summary

The remedy of an account of profits was available against a defendant who had dishonestly assisted in another's breach of fiduciary duties.

## Abstract

The first appellant businessman (Y) and the second and third appellants (X and H), companies controlled by Y, appealed against findings (_[[2012] EWHC 3586 (Comm)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I62ECF7F048AF11E29B75F82715DC72CB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_) that they had dishonestly assisted a breach of fiduciary duty. The first respondent (N) cross-appealed against the interest rate on the judgment debt in its favour.

The judge had held that a former employee (M) of N had sought bribes, in breach of his fiduciary obligations to N. M had negotiated charters of vessels. The judge found that M had required, as the price of obtaining certain charters, bribes to himself and X. M had also arranged further charters to H. The judge held that Y had dishonestly assisted M, and that assistance extended to H's charters as Y had known that he was continuing a corrupt relationship. The judge therefore made orders against the appellants, including that they should account for profits on H's charters.

The appellants (1) challenged the judge's findings of fact; (2) argued that no account of profits was available in dishonest assistance cases. N, whose judgment was in US dollars, argued that the judge had erred in departing from the interest rate given in the [Judgments Act 1838 s.17(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF9513270E44711DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default)), or in failing to adopt a rate that compensated it, given that it had been awarded compound interest up to the judgment date.

## Held

Appeal allowed in part, cross-appeal dismissed.

(1) The judge's findings of fact were upheld (see paras [13-61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) Earlier cases had described dishonest assistants' liability as "accountable in equity". Both liability to make good loss and liability to account for profits followed from the premise that defendants were held liable to account as if they were trustees to the claimant, _[Paragon Finance Plc v DB Thakerar & Co [1999] 1 All E.R. 400, [1998] 7 WLUK 420](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7F9E5220E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366, [2002] 12 WLUK 137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9B82A9A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Knowing recipients or dishonest assistants had, in principle, the responsibility of express trustees, _[Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v Tan [1995] 2 A.C. 378, [1995] 5 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9062CDB1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. That responsibility included, in appropriate cases, liability to account for profits, _[Cook v Deeks [1916] 1 A.C. 554, [1916] 2 WLUK 61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8D985880E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Further, where an equitable wrong was linked with a breach of fiduciary duty, there was no reason why a court of equity should be unable to order the wrongdoer to disgorge such of his profits as were derived from the wrongdoing, _[Attorney General v Blake [2001] 1 A.C. 268, [2000] 7 WLUK 824](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69119B70E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Murad v Al-Saraj [2005] EWCA Civ 959, [2005] W.T.L.R. 1573, [2005] 7 WLUK 945](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I096CA1F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [74-75, 82-85](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Regarding limitation, there was no differentiation between knowing recipients and dishonest assistants, _[Williams v Central Bank of Nigeria [2014] UKSC 10, [2014] A.C. 1189, [2014] 2 WLUK 621](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IFF35180099CA11E38FB2A4A8BB3E9172/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Liability to account in equity did not depend on receipt of trust property, Dubai Aluminium applied. It would be inappropriate to differentiate between the availability of remedies regarding profits made by a knowing recipient and those made by a dishonest assistant (para.[86](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). To found liability for knowing receipt there had to be trust property. However, an account of profits was available against a dishonest assistant, even if the relevant fiduciary breach did not involve misapplication of trust property, _[Satnam Investments Ltd v Dunlop Heywood & Co Ltd [1999] 3 All E.R. 652, [1998] 12 WLUK 472](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I98113420E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Brown v Bennett [1999] B.C.C. 525, [1998] 12 WLUK 1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D5194D0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [89-93](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). A fiduciary's liability to account for a secret profit did not depend on causation, as Murad showed. However, Murad did not mean that causation was not required in dishonest assistance cases, Murad and _[Fyffes Group Ltd v Templeman [2000] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 643, [2000] 5 WLUK 597](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAC30FCC0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. A causal connection was required, _[Grupo Torras SA v Al-Sabah (No.5) [2001] Lloyd's Rep. Bank. 36, [2000] 11 WLUK 76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB56F2AF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Casio Computer Co Ltd v Sayo (No.3) [2001] EWCA Civ 661, [2001] I.L.Pr. 43, [2001] 4 WLUK 332](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I83177120E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Y had not been sued as a fiduciary but as one committing an equitable wrong. The judge had applied the considerations applying to a fiduciary to a dishonest assistance case. On the facts, there had been insufficient causal connections between entry into H's charters and the profits (paras [96-115](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Further, where a claim for an account of profits was made against one who was not a fiduciary, the court had discretion to grant or withhold the remedy, Blake and Fyffes applied. An account of profits would be disproportionate on the instant facts (paras [119-120](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) The judge had not erred in departing from the 1838 Act rate. Section 17's purpose had been to ensure that judgment creditors were not penalised by being kept out of their money. The failure since 1993 to vary the rate broadly in line with market conditions had produced an anomaly, but not one that N, as the holder of a US dollar judgment debt, could complain of. The failure could not affect the purpose of the Act or Parliament's intention in giving the court power to award an appropriate rate on foreign currency judgment debts. If it had intended to impose an arbitrary rate for purposes other than simple compensation, Parliament would have repealed or amended the [Administration of Justice Act 1970 s.44A](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF8683C90E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=300bebddb0214a6b87fbd6b52dbfd924&contextData=(sc.Default)) (paras [133-138](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The judge had considered that cessation of compounding was a consequence of judgment; he had rightly considered that simple interest was generally regarded as adequate compensation. Moreover, to award an artificially high interest rate to achieve the equivalent of compound interest posed problems: the court could not know how long the judgment would remain outstanding. Further, the judge's order had been well within the broad discretion under s.44A (para.[141](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
