---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:22 am
---

# R (on the application of Denby Collins) v the Secretary of State for Justice [2016] EWHC 3

## Summary

A former soldier who developed a chronic widespread pain condition as a result of an accident which occurred while he was serving as a paratrooper succeeded in establishing a claim against his employer where there was a clear temporal association between the accident and the onset of his symptoms, and between his initial physical injuries and the main sites of his complaints of long-term pain.

## Abstract

A former soldier claimed damages for personal injuries arising from an accident which occurred while he was serving as a paratrooper.

The accident took place in October 2010 when the claimant was aged 21. He was struck on the head by a heavy roll of fabric thrown by two of his colleagues in the course of unloading goods vehicles. As a result of the accident, the claimant was knocked unconscious. He developed chronic widespread pain (CWP), which was long-term and possibly permanent. He took a great deal of medication to cope with the pain. He had blurred vision for about three months after the accident and suffered occasional loss of bladder control. He was very keen to return to active duty and undertook a lot of physical exercise. To cope with the pain, he began mixing his medication with alcohol and became aggressive as a result. His marriage suffered. He made two suicide attempts, in early 2011 and late 2012, as a result of depression. In October 2011 the claimant had facet joint injections which improved his pain. However, he was medically discharged from the army in September 2013. The claimant was from a military family and had joined the Army at 17. He claimed that he would have served a full career in the Army had it not been for the accident and would have attained the rank of staff sergeant. At the date of the hearing, he was working as a manager in the NHS. The defendant admitted a breach of its duty of care to the claimant and accepted that his CWP condition was genuine, but disputed that it was triggered by the accident. The claimant relied on a psychiatric report which indicated that he had begun to suffer depression in December 2010 and had developed an adjustment disorder in late 2012 when he knew that he would lose his Army career. The claimant had suffered knee pain in 2009 which had resolved before the accident.

## Held

Judgment for claimant.

(1) The claimant had made strenuous attempts to regain fitness while in the Army in order to become deployable and had been keen to establish that he was medically fit in order to return to full duties. When giving evidence, his low mood and frustration were evident. He had been suffering from symptoms of mixed anxiety and depression since early 2011. There was no evidence that he had already suffered from a pain syndrome based on the experience of knee pain in 2009. The fact that he had had pain which persisted for several months did not put him in a category of suffering from a chronic pain syndrome. There was evidence that CWP was capable of being triggered by trauma. There was a clear temporal association between the accident and the onset of the claimant's symptoms, and between his initial physical injuries and the main sites of his complaints of long-term pain. Although there had been periods of improvement, there was no significant period of time in which he was symptom-free before the onset of CWP. Accordingly, causation was established (see paras [156-161, 164-167, 169, 171, 178, 180-184](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) Within the Judicial College Guidelines, the case was toward the upper end of the lower bracket of "Other pain disorders" with minor injuries which would have resolved within three months. The appropriate award for general damages, taking into account both the initial physical symptoms, the CWP and the overlapping psychiatric difficulties, was £30,000. The claimant had had at least a 54% prospect of remaining in the Army for 24 years. He had suffered a loss of his chosen lifestyle, and the impact of the loss of status and personal identity was significant. The sum of £10,000 was therefore awarded for loss of congenial employment, _[Hanks v Ministry of Defence [2007] EWHC 966 (QB), [2007] 5 WLUK 4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IED60D460F85B11DBB75C9C54D5E85C94/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a6fb6f36b8d94bc5935aaa4a06f439bb&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. In view of the claimant's employment, a Blamire-type award based on the current shortfall in take-home pay and the time he would have served in the Army was not appropriate. Most of the physical limitations he suffered affected his personal life but there was some impact on his work. Although he was disabled within the meaning of the [Equality Act 2010](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I41441D70491811DFA976CC93D6A34407/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a6fb6f36b8d94bc5935aaa4a06f439bb&contextData=(sc.Default)), his disability was modest. His employment was secure and his handicap on the labour market was limited. Given the claimant's particular circumstances, the case of _[Billett v Ministry of Defence [2015] EWCA Civ 773, [2016] P.I.Q.R. Q1, [2015] 7 WLUK 774](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE9EA9990315711E5B765A68758983E7B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=a6fb6f36b8d94bc5935aaa4a06f439bb&contextData=(sc.Default))_ provided more useful guidance than the Ogden tables, Billet followed. An award of £50,000 was made on the basis of Smith v Manchester in addition to an award for loss of earnings based on what he would have earned in the Army compared with what he would earn up to the time when he would have left. The parties were invited to agree the final award (paras [186-187, 202-207, 211-213, 218](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
