---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:27 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:22 am
---

# R (on the application of Denby Collins) v the Secretary of State for Justice [2016] EWHC 33 (Admin)

## Summary

The plain words of the [Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 s.76(5A)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)), read in the context of their statutory setting, legislative purpose and the common law on self-defence, meant that in householder cases, the force used in self-defence was not unreasonable simply because it was disproportionate, only if it was grossly disproportionate. It was open to a jury to conclude that the force used by a householder in self-defence was objectively disproportionate but nonetheless reasonable given what the householder believed the circumstances to be. Section 76(5A) was compatible with [ECHR art.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)); the existence of the defence did not deter offences against the person in householder cases.

## Abstract

The court was required to determine whether the so-called "householder's defence", contained in the [Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 s.76(5A)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)), was compatible with [ECHR art.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The claimant had sustained serious personal injury after he had been forced into a headlock by a homeowner whose house he had broken into. There was a police investigation following which the CPS decided not to prosecute the homeowner.

## Held

Judgment accordingly.

It was clear that [s.76(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)) adopted and preserved the second limb of self-defence at common law. The central question remained whether the degree of force used by a defendant was "reasonable in the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be", and not whether the force used was proportionate, disproportionate or grossly disproportionate. The standard remained that which was reasonable: the other provisions, in particular s.76(5A) and [s.76(6)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)), provided the context in which the question of what was reasonable had to be approached. The operation of s.76(5A) automatically excluded a degree of force which was grossly disproportionate from being reasonable in householder cases. If the degree of force was not grossly disproportionate, s.76(5A) did not prevent that degree of force from being considered reasonable within the meaning of the second self-defence limb. On the other hand, it did not direct that any degree of force less than grossly disproportionate was reasonable. Whether it was reasonable would depend on the particular facts and circumstances of the case. Accordingly, s.76(5A) read together with s.76(3) and the common law on self-defence required two separate questions to be put to the jury in householder cases. Presuming that the defendant genuinely believed that it was necessary to use force to defend himself, those questions were: (a) whether the degree of force used by the defendant was grossly disproportionate in the circumstances as he believed them to be; (b) whether the degree of force used was nonetheless reasonable in the circumstances as he believed them to be. On the plain words of [s.76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)), a jury should consider those questions disjunctively: the answer to the first question did not provide an answer to the second. The effect of s.76(5A) was to allow a discretionary area of judgment in householder cases, with a different emphasis to that which applied in other cases. In deciding whether the degree of force was reasonable, it was necessary to take into account the fact that a person acting in self-defence might not be able to weigh to a nicety the exact measure of any necessary action, and that evidence of a person having only done what he honestly and instinctively thought necessary to defend himself constituted potent evidence that the force used was reasonable. In almost all cases the degree of force used would be reasonable if it was proportionate but that did not equate the two meanings: s.76(6) permitted a finding that force which was proportionate was not reasonable. In all those circumstances, the construction placed on s.76(5A) by the editors of Archbold 2016, namely that force in a householder case was only to be regarded as unreasonable if it was grossly disproportionate, was not an accurate statement of law (see paras [18-20, 22-25, 33-34](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

In deciding whether the s.76(5A) defence was compatible with art.2, the question was whether the criminal law of England and Wales effectively deterred offences against the person in householder cases. The effect of s.76(5A) was not to give householders a carte blanche in the degree of force they used against intruders in self-defence. A jury ultimately had to decide whether the householder's actions were reasonable in the circumstances as he believed them to be. A jury might consider the actions of a householder in self-defence to be more than what might objectively be described as the minimum proportionate response, but nevertheless reasonable given the particular and extenuating circumstances of the case. That did not weaken the capacity of the criminal law of England and Wales to deter offences against the person in householder cases. The headline message remained clear: a householder would only be able to avail himself of the s.76(5A) defence if the degree of force used was reasonable in the circumstances as he believed them to be. In that context, it was not irrelevant that the householder's art.2 and [art.8](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I13AEBA7190CB4FD6878845F048D2A987/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)) rights were also engaged. The ECtHR had consistently held that the reasonableness limb of self-defence as applied in state actor cases was compatible with the [art.2(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)) requirement of "absolute necessity", _[McCann v United Kingdom (A/324) (1996) 21 E.H.R.R. 97, [1995] 9 WLUK 163](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF4C3A190E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Bubbins v United Kingdom (50196/99) (2005) 41 E.H.R.R. 24, [2005] 3 WLUK 564](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7CE76D50E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Bennett v United Kingdom (5527/08) [2011] Inquest L.R. 218, [2010] 12 WLUK 193](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I212D3DE03A2C11E0A68CDE0528A71283/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. On any view, therefore, the test of reasonableness in private party householder cases would not cause a breach of the [art.2(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1B58031DEC86485FA3AEEFBD8980CD10/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e440903e34394b03a2d87f718d2dfe84&contextData=(sc.Default)) positive obligation. In those circumstances, there were reasonable safeguards against the commission of offences against the person in householder cases. The criminal law of England and Wales on self-defence in householder cases fulfilled the framework obligation under art.2(1) (paras [58, 61-64, 70](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
