---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:21 am
---

# R v Clinton, Parker and Evans [2012] EWCA Crim 2

## Summary

In murder cases, for the purposes of the partial defence of loss of control, sexual infidelity might properly be taken into consideration by virtue of the [Coroners and Justice Act 2009 s.54](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)) where it was integral to the facts as a whole, being one of a number of factors which caused the defendant to lose control. In such circumstances, the prohibition in [s.55(6)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)) would not operate to exclude it.

## Abstract

The court was required, in conjoined appeals, to consider the prohibition in the [Coroners and Justice Act 2009 s.55(6)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)) of sexual infidelity as a qualifying trigger for the purposes of the loss of control defence.

The issue was whether sexual infidelity was wholly excluded from consideration where features of the individual case constituted permissible qualifying triggers within [s.55(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.55(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)).

## Held

Appeals allowed in part.

(1) The Act was designed to prohibit the misuse of sexual infidelity as a potential trigger for the defence of loss of control in circumstances where it was thought to have been misused in the former defence of provocation. Therefore, if sexual infidelity was the only potential trigger, the prohibition in s.55(6)(c) had to be applied. However, s.55(6)(c) did not eradicate the fact that sexual infidelity and loss of control were sometimes linked. [Section 54(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.54(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4335cee74069487691ef04270758e627&contextData=(sc.Default)) indicated that sexual infidelity was a potential ingredient of the third component of the loss of control defence when all the defendant's circumstances fell for consideration; some aspects of the defendant's situation were expressly excluded from consideration under s.54, but sexual betrayal was not one of them. In relation to s.55, qualifying triggers were subject to clear statutory criteria, and whether the criteria were met was a fact-specific question requiring careful and objective evaluation on a case-by-case basis. Events could not be isolated from their context; a judgement had to be made about the gravity of the circumstances, the extent to which the defendant had been seriously wronged and whether he or she had a justifiable sense of having been seriously wronged. Sexual infidelity could be compartmentalised and disregarded where it was the only element relied upon in support of a qualifying trigger, but it was unrealistic and potentially unjust to exclude it when it was integral to the facts as a whole (see paras [34-40](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

The court construed individually, and gave guidance about, the three statutory components to the loss of control defence, namely  
(a) the nature of the loss of self control (para.[10](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs"));  
(b) the qualifying trigger provisions in s.55, including whether "things said" constituted sexual infidelity (paras [11-29](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")); and  
(c) the way in which a defendant reacted and lost control against the measure of "a normal degree of tolerance and self-restraint" (paras [30-32](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The court also gave guidance about the judge's responsibilities at the end of the evidence and about how the jury should be directed when sexual infidelity provided an appropriate context for the offence (para.[49](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(2) C's appeal was allowed and a re-trial ordered because the judge had misdirected herself about the possible relevance of the wife's infidelity. The totality of the matters relied on as a qualifying trigger had been of sufficient weight to leave to the jury (paras [50-78](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). P's and E's appeals were dismissed because the loss of control defences had been put to the jury and the jury directions had been impeccable (P's case: paras [79-106](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs"); E's case: paras [107-132](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

# Judgment

**Introduction**

- The difficulties of giving consistent effect to section 3 of the Homicide Act 1957, which encapsulated in statutory form the common law defence of provocation, were notorious. As Professor David Ormerod observes in Smith & Hogan's, Criminal Law, 13th Edition, "For the appellate courts to fluctuate so often and so significantly on the interpretations of a defence in cases of such seriousness led to confusion and presented a disappointing spectacle". This measured criticism is entirely justified. With effect from 4 October 2010 section 3 of the 1957 Act ceased to have effect. The ancient common law defence of provocation, reducing murder to manslaughter, was abolished and consigned to legal history books.
- It was replaced by sections 54 and 55 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (the 2009 Act) which created a new partial defence to murder, "loss of control". Just because loss of control was an essential ingredient of the old provocation defence, the name is evocative of it. It therefore needs to be emphasised at the outset that the new statutory defence is self-contained. Its common law heritage is irrelevant. The full ambit of the defence is encompassed within these statutory provisions. Unfortunately there are aspects of the legislation which, to put it with appropriate deference, are likely to produce surprising results.
- In order to enlighten our understanding our attention was drawn to different passages in the Report of the Law Commission (Report No. 290, _Partial Defence as to Murder_ (2004), the Law Commission Consultation Paper No. 177, _A New Homicide Act for England_ (2005) and the Law Commission Report No. 304 (_Murder, Manslaughter and Infanticide_ (2006). In July 2008 the Ministry of Justice issued its consultation paper in response to these recommendations, _Murder, Manslaughter and Infanticide; proposals for reform of the law_. Although the title of the Law Commission Report was adopted, its contents were selectively chosen. Looked at overall, the legislation does not sufficiently follow the recommendations of the Law Commission to enable us to discern any close link between the views and recommendations of the Law Commission and the legislation as enacted.
- In these appeals the main focus of our attention is the controversial provision which relates to the impact on the "loss of control" defence of what is described as "sexual infidelity". We looked, de bene esse, at the debates in Parliament prior to the enactment. Even on the most generous interpretation of _Pepper v Hart_, the debates did not reveal anything which assisted in the process of legislative construction. So we must ascertain the meaning of these provisions from their language. As we shall explain, however, the conclusion we have reached is consistent not only with the views which would have been expressed by those who were opposed to this provision in its entirety, but also with the views expressed by ministers responsible for the legislation during its passage through Parliament.

**The convictions**

- These are appeals against conviction for murder by:

(a) Jon-Jacques Clinton was born in 1965. On 15th November 2010 he killed his wife, Dawn Clinton, then aged 33 years, in the family home in Bracknell. On 23rd May 2011, in the Crown Court at Reading before Her Honour Judge Smith, he was convicted of murder and arson. On the following day he was sentenced to imprisonment for life on count 1, with a specified minimum term of 26 years, less 187 days, for murder and to 2 years imprisonment concurrent on count 2. The verdict was returned by the jury after considering the partial defence of diminished responsibility. Judge Smith ruled that there was insufficient evidence of loss of control for that issue to be considered by the jury. The correctness or otherwise of this decision forms the basis for the present appeal.

(b) On 26th October 2010 Stephen Parker killed his wife, Jane Parker, in the family home in …. On 9th May 2011, in the Crown Court at Hull before His Honour Judge Mettyear, the jury rejected the loss of control defence and convicted him of murdering his wife. He was sentenced to imprisonment for life. The specified minimum term was 17 years, less 196 days.

(c) Dewi Evans killed his wife … on 11th November 2010 in the matrimonial home in South Wales. On 29th June 2011, in the Crown Court at Swansea before Mr Justice Lloyd Jones, again, the jury rejected the loss of control defence and he was convicted of murdering his wife. He was sentenced to imprisonment for life, with a minimum specified term of 11 years, less 248 days.

**The legislation**

**The "loss of control" defence**

- Section 54 of the 2009 Act provides:

> "**Partial Defence to Murder: loss of control**

> (1) Where a person ("D") kills or is party to the killing of another ("V"), D is not to be convicted of murder if –

> > > (a) D's acts and omissions in doing or being a party to the killing resulted from D's loss of self-control,

> > > (b) the loss of self-control had a qualifying trigger, and

> > > (c) a person of D's sex and age, with a normal degree of tolerance and self-restraint and in the circumstances of D, might have reacted in the same or in a similar way to D.

> (2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a), it does not matter whether or not the loss of control was sudden.

> (3) In subsection 1(c) the reference to "the circumstances of D" is a reference to all of D's circumstances other than those whose only relevance to D's conduct is that they bear on D's general capacity for tolerance or self-restraint.

> (4) Subsection (1) does not apply if, in doing or being a party to the killing, D acted in a considered desire for revenge.

> (5) On a charge of murder, if sufficient evidence is adduced to raise an issue with respect to the defence under subsection (1), the jury must assume that the defence is satisfied unless the prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that it is not.

> (6) For the purposes of subsection (5), sufficient evidence is adduced to raise an issue with respect to the defence if evidence is adduced on which, in the opinion of the trial judge, a jury, properly directed, could reasonably conclude that the defence might apply.

> (7) A person who, but for this section, would be liable to be convicted of murder is liable instead to be convicted of manslaughter.

> (8) The fact that one party to a killing is by virtue of this section not liable to be convicted of murder does not affect the question whether the killing amounted to murder in the case of any other party to it. "

- Section 55 provides:

> "**Meaning of "qualifying trigger"**

> (1) This section applies for the purposes of section 54.

> (2) A loss of self-control had a qualifying trigger if subsection (3), (4) or (5) applies.

> (3) This subsection applies if D's loss of self-control was attributable to D's fear of serious violence from V against D or another identified person.

> (4) This subsection applies if D's loss of self-control was attributable to a thing or things done or said (or both) which –

> > > (a) constituted circumstances of an extremely grave character, and

> > > (b) caused D to have a justifiable sense of being seriously wronged.

> (5) This subsection applies if D's loss of self-control was attributable to a combination of the matters mentioned in subsections (3) and (4).

> (6) In determining whether a loss of self-control had a qualifying trigger –

> > (a) D's fear of serious violence is to be disregarded to the extent that it was caused by a thing which D incited to be done or said for the purpose of providing an excuse to use violence;

> > (b) a sense of being seriously wronged by a thing done or said is not justifiable if D incited the thing to be done or said for the purpose of providing an excuse to use violence;

> > (c) the fact that a thing done or said constituted sexual infidelity is to be disregarded.

(7) In this section references to "D" and "V" are to be construed in accordance with section 54."

- This is the "loss of control" defence in its entirety. Its components are set out in section 54(1), as amplified in section 55. There is however a further reference in the 2009 Act to the concept of loss of control. Section 2 of the Homicide Act 1957, which dealt with the diminished responsibility defence, has been replaced by section 52 of the 2009 Act and, as with the law relating to provocation, the ingredients of the defence have changed. Its potential relevance to the issues under discussion is readily identified. There are cases, and _Clinton_ was one, where the defences of loss of control and diminished responsibility will be raised in the same proceedings. The defence arises from an abnormality of mental functioning which

> "… (b) substantially impaired D's ability to do one or more of the things mentioned in sub-section (1a) and …

> (1A) those things are -

> (a) to understand the nature of D's conduct;

> (b) to form a rational judgment;

> (c) to exercise self-control. …"

- The first feature of section 54 is that it identifies three statutory components (or ingredients) to the "loss of control" defence. We begin by emphasising that each is integral to it. If one is absent, the defence fails. It is therefore inevitable that the components should be analysed sequentially and separately. However, it is worth emphasising that in many cases where there is a genuine loss of control, the remaining components are likely to arise for consideration simultaneously or virtually so, at or very close to the moment when the fatal violence is used. Further, the discussion will proceed in terms which suggest that the defendant seeking to advance the loss of control defence is not always male. This is because experience shows that women as well as men kill when they have lost self control. In the legislation no special provision is made for the gender of the killer. Finally, by way of introduction, we do not overlook that the burden of disproof is on the prosecution.

**The first component**

- For present purposes, subsection 1(a), which addresses the first ingredient, is self explanatory. The killing must have resulted from the loss of self control. The loss of control need not be sudden, but it must have been lost. That is essential. Before reaching the second ingredient, the qualifying trigger, there is a further hurdle, that the defendant must not have been acting in a "considered" desire for revenge. The possible significance of "considered" arises in the appeal of _Evans_. In the broad context of the legislative structure, there does not appear to be very much room for any "considered" deliberation. In reality, the greater the level of deliberation, the less likely it will be that the killing followed a true loss of self control.

**The second component**

- The qualifying trigger provisions are self contained in section 55. There is no point in pretending that the practical application of this provision will not create considerable difficulties. Sections 55(3) and (4) define the circumstances in which a qualifying trigger may be present. The statutory language is not bland. In section 55(3) it is not enough that the defendant is fearful of violence. He must fear _serious_ violence. In subsection (4)(a) the circumstances must not merely be grave, but _extremely_ so. In subsection (4)(b) it is not enough that the defendant has been caused by the circumstances to feel a sense of grievance. It must arise from a _justifiable_ sense not merely that he has been wronged, but that he has been _seriously_ wronged. By contrast with the former law of provocation, these provisions, as Mr Michael Birnbaum QC, on behalf of Clinton submitted, have raised the bar. We have been used to a much less prescriptive approach to the provocation defence.
- Mr Birnbaum submitted, and we think correctly, that the defendant himself must have a sense of having been seriously wronged. However even if he has, that is not the end of it. In short, the defendant cannot invite the jury to acquit him of murder on the ground of loss of control because he personally sensed that he had been seriously wronged in circumstances which he personally regarded as extremely grave. The questions whether the circumstances were extremely grave, and whether the defendant's sense of grievance was justifiable, indeed all the requirements of section 55(4)(a) and (b), require objective evaluation.
- The process of objective evaluation in each individual case is hugely complicated by the prohibitions in section 55(6) which identifies a number of features which are expressly excluded from consideration as qualifying triggers. Thus the defendant, who, looking for trouble to the extent of inciting or exciting violence loses his control, does not qualify. In effect self induced loss of control will not run. The most critical problem, however, which lies at the heart of the _Clinton_ appeal, is subsection 6(c), "sexual infidelity".
- This provision was described by Mr Andrew Edis QC, who acted for the prosecution in each of the appeals, as a "formidably difficult provision": so indeed it is. On the face of the statutory language, however grave the betrayal, however humiliating, indeed however provocative in the ordinary sense of the word it may be, sexual infidelity is to be disregarded as a qualifying trigger. Nevertheless, other forms of betrayal or humiliation of sufficient gravity may fall within the qualifying triggers specified in section 55(4). What, therefore, is the full extent of the prohibition?
- We highlight some of the matters raised in argument to illustrate some of the potential problems. This list is not comprehensive. The forensic analysis could have gone on much longer, and so, for that matter, could this judgment.
- We immediately acknowledge that the exclusion of sexual infidelity as a potential qualifying trigger is consistent with the concept of the autonomy of each individual. Of course, whatever the position may have been in times past, it is now clearly understood, and in the present context the law underlines, that no one (male or female) owns or possesses his or her spouse or partner. Nevertheless daily experience in both criminal and family courts demonstrates that the breakdown of relationships, whenever they occur, and for whatever reason, is always fraught with tension and difficulty, with the possibility of misunderstanding and the potential for apparently irrational fury. Meanwhile experience over many generations has shown that, however it may become apparent, when it does, sexual infidelity has the potential to create a highly emotional situation or to exacerbate a fraught situation, and to produce a completely unpredictable, and sometimes violent response. This may have nothing to do with any notional "rights" that the one may believe that he or she has over the other, and often stems from a sense of betrayal and heartbreak, and crushed dreams.
- Mr Birnbaum drew attention to and adopted much of the illuminating and critical commentary by Professor Ormerod at pp.520-522 in Smith and Hogan's Criminal Law. To begin with, there is no definition of "sexual infidelity". Who and what is embraced in this concept? Is sexual infidelity to be construed narrowly so as to refer only to conduct which is related directly and exclusively to sexual activity? Only the words and acts constituting sexual activity are to be disregarded: on one construction, therefore, the effects are not. What acts relating to infidelity, but distinguishable from it on the basis that they are not "sexual", may be taken into account? Is the provision directly concerned with sexual infidelity, or with envy and jealousy and possessiveness, the sort of obsession that leads to violence against the victim on the basis expressed in the sadly familiar language, "if I cannot have him/her, then no one else will/can"? The notion of infidelity appears to involve a relationship between the two people to which one party may be unfaithful. Is a one-night-stand sufficient for this purpose?
- Take a case like _R v Stingel_ [1990] 171 CLR 312, an Australian case where a jealous stalker, who stabbed his quarry when he found her, on his account, having sexual intercourse. He does not face any difficulty with this element of the offence, just because, so far as the stalker was concerned, there was no sexual infidelity by his victim at all. Is the jealous spouse to be excluded when the stalker is not? In _R v Tabeel Lewis_ … an 18 year old Jehovah's Witness killed his lover, a 63 year old co-religionist, because on one view, he was ashamed of the consequences, if she carried out her threat to reveal their affair to the community. She was not sexually unfaithful to him, but he killed her because he feared that she would betray him, not sexually, but by revealing their secret. Mr Birnbaum asked rhetorically, why should the law exclude one kind of betrayal by a lover but not another?
- Mr Edis agreed that "sexual infidelity" is not defined. He suggested that its ambit is not confined to "adultery" and that no marriage or civil partnership ceremony or any formal arrangement is required to render the violent reaction of the defendant to the sexual infidelity of the deceased impermissible for the purposes of a qualifying trigger. He suggested however that the concept of "infidelity" involves a breach of mutual understanding which is to be inferred within the relationship, as well as any of the more obvious expressions of fidelity, such as those to be found in the marriage vows. Notwithstanding their force, these considerations do not quite address the specific requirement that the infidelity to be disregarded must be "sexual" infidelity. The problem was illustrated when Mr Edis postulated the example of a female victim who decided to end a relationship and made clear to her former partner that it was at an end, and whether expressly or by implication, that she regarded herself as free to have sexual intercourse with whomsoever she wanted. After the end of the relationship, any such sexual activity could not sensibly be called "infidelity". If so, for the purposes of any qualifying trigger, it would not be caught by the prohibition in section 55(6)(c). In such a case the exercise of what Mr Edis described as her sexual freedom might possibly be taken into account in support of the defence, if she was killed by her former partner, whereas, if notwithstanding her disillusionment with it, she had attempted to keep the relationship going, while from time to time having intercourse with others, it could not.
- Mr Birnbaum and Mr Edis could readily have identified a large number of situations arising in the real world which, as a result of the statutory provision, would be productive of surprising anomalies. We cannot resolve them in advance. Whatever the anomalies to which it may give rise, the statutory provision is unequivocal: loss of control triggered by sexual infidelity cannot, on its own, qualify as a trigger for the purposes of the second component of this defence. This is the clear effect of the legislation.
- The question however is whether it is a consequence of the legislation that sexual infidelity is similarly excluded when it may arise for consideration in the context of another or a number of other features of the case which are said to constitute an appropriate permissible qualifying trigger. The issue is complex.
- To assist in its resolution, Mr Edis drew attention to the formal guidance issued by the Crown Prosecution Service on this issue. This provides that "it is the issue of sexual infidelity that falls to be disregarded under sub-section (6)(c). However certain parts of the case may still amount to a defence under section 55(4)". The example is given of the defendant who kills her husband because he has raped her sister (an act of sexual infidelity). In such a case the act of sexual infidelity may be disregarded and her actions may constitute a qualifying trigger under section 55(4).
- This example is interesting as far as it goes, and we understand it to mean that the context in which sexual infidelity may arise may be relevant to the existence of a qualifying trigger, but in truth it is too easy. Any individual who witnesses a rape may well suffer temporary loss of control in circumstances in which a qualifying trigger might well be deemed to be present, although in the case of a rape of a stranger, insufficient to cause the defendant to have a sense of being seriously wronged personally. A much more formidable and difficult example would be the defendant who kills her husband when she suddenly finds him having enthusiastic, consensual sexual intercourse with her sister. Taken on its own, the effect of the legislation is that any loss of control consequent on such a gross betrayal would be totally excluded from consideration as a qualifying trigger. Let us for the purposes of argument take the same example a little further. The defendant returns home unexpectedly and finds her spouse or partner having consensual sexual intercourse with her sister (or indeed with anyone else), and entirely reasonably, but vehemently, complains about what has suddenly confronted her. The response by the unfaithful spouse or partner, and/or his or her new sexual companion, is to justify what he had been doing, by shouting and screaming, mercilessly taunting and deliberately using hurtful language which implies that she, not he, is responsible for his infidelity. The taunts and distressing words, which do not themselves constitute sexual infidelity, would fall to be considered as a possible qualifying trigger. The idea that, in the search for a qualifying trigger, the context in which such words are used should be ignored represents an artificiality which the administration of criminal justice should do without. And if the taunts by the unfaithful partner suggested that the sexual activity which had just been taking place was infinitely more gratifying than any earlier sexual relationship with the defendant, are those insults – in effect using sexual infidelity to cause deliberate distress - to be ignored? On the view of the legislation advanced for our consideration by Mr Edis, they must be. Yet, in most criminal cases, as our recent judgment in the context of the riots and public order demonstrates, context is critical.
- We considered the example of the wife who has been physically abused over a long period, and whose loss of self control was attributable to yet another beating by her husband, but also, for the first time, during the final beating, taunts of his sexual activities with another woman or other women. And so, after putting up with years of violent ill-treatment, what in reality finally caused the defendant's loss of control was hurtful language boasting of his sexual infidelity. Those words were the final straw. Mr Edis invited us to consider (he did not support the contention) whether, on a narrow interpretation of the statutory structure, if evidence to that effect were elicited (as it might, in cross-examination), there would then be no sufficient qualifying trigger at all. Although the persistent beating might in a different case fall within the provisions for qualifying triggers in section 55(4)(a) and (b), in the case we are considering, the wife had endured the violence and would have continued to endure it but for the sudden discovery of her husband's infidelity. On this basis the earlier history of violence, as well as the violence on the instant occasion, would not, without reference to the claims of sexual infidelity, carry sufficient weight to constitute a qualifying trigger. Yet in the real world the husband's conduct over the years, and the impact of what he said on the particular occasion when he was killed, should surely be considered as a whole.
- We addressed the same issue in discussion about the impact of the words "things said" within subsection 55(6)(c). Everyone can understand how a thing done may constitute sexual infidelity, but this argument revolved around finding something "said" which "constituted" sexual infidelity. Mr Edis accepted that no utterance, as such, could constitute sexual infidelity, at any rate as narrowly construed. Professor Ormerod suggests the example of a defendant hearing a wife say to her lover, "I love you". On close examination, this may or may not provide evidence of _sexual_ infidelity. However it does not necessarily "constitute" it, and whether it does or not depends on the relationship between the parties, and the person by whom and to whom and the circumstances in which the endearment is spoken. It may constitute a betrayal without any sexual contact or intention. Mr Birnbaum raised another question. He pointed out that in the case of Clinton, Mrs Clinton confessed to having had an affair on the day before she was killed, but earlier she boasted that she had had sex with five men. If the boast, intended to hurt, was simply untrue, how could those words "constitute" infidelity?
- We are required to make sense of this provision. It would be illogical for a defendant to be able to rely on an untrue statement about the victim's sexual infidelity as a qualifying trigger in support of the defence, but not on a truthful one. Equally, it would be quite unrealistic to limit its ambit to words spoken to his or her lover by the unfaithful spouse or partner during sexual activity. In our judgment things "said" includes admissions of sexual infidelity (even if untrue) as well as reports (by others) of sexual infidelity. Such admissions or reports will rarely if ever be uttered without a context, and almost certainly a painful one. In short, the words will almost invariably be spoken as part of a highly charged discussion in which many disturbing comments will be uttered, often on both sides.
- We must briefly return to the second example suggested by Professor Ormerod, that is the defendant telling his spouse or partner that he or she loves someone else. As we have said, this may or may not provide evidence of _sexual_ infidelity. But it is entirely reasonable to assume that, faced with such an assertion, the defendant will ask who it is, and is likely to go on to ask whether they have already had an affair. If the answer is "no" there would not appear to be any sexual infidelity. If the answer is "yes", then obviously there has been. If the answer is "no", but it is perfectly obvious that the departing spouse intends to begin a full relationship with the new partner, would that constitute sexual infidelity? And is there a relevant distinction between the defendant who believes that a sexual relationship has already developed, and one who believes that it has not, but that in due course it will. Situations arising from overhearing the other party to a relationship saying "I love you", or saying to the defendant, "I love someone else", simple enough words, will give rise to manifold difficulties in the context of the prohibition on sexual infidelity as a qualifying trigger.
- This discussion of the impact of the statutory prohibition in section 55(6)(c) arises, we emphasise, in the context, not of an academic symposium, but a trial process in which the defendant will be entitled to give evidence. There is no prohibition on the defendant telling the whole story about the relevant events, including the fact and impact of sexual infidelity. To the contrary: this evidence will have to be considered and evaluated by the jury. That is because notwithstanding that sexual infidelity must be disregarded for the purposes of the second component if it stands alone as a qualifying trigger, for the reasons which follow it is plainly relevant to any questions which arise in the context of the third component, and indeed to one of the alternative defences to murder, as amended in the 2009 Act, diminished responsibility.
- We shall return to the question whether, notwithstanding that it must be disregarded if it is the only qualifying trigger, a thing done or said which constitutes sexual infidelity is properly available for consideration in the course of evaluating any qualifying trigger which is not otherwise prohibited by the legislation.

**The third component**

- Assuming that the qualifying trigger is present, the defence is still not complete. We must return from section 55 to section 54 (1)(c). This third ingredient is related to the requirement, that even faced with situations which may amount to a qualifying trigger, the defendant is nevertheless expected to exercise a degree of self control. For this purpose the age and sex of the defendant is relevant. Perhaps a very immature defendant will be less likely to be able to exercise the self control which might be exercised by an adult. The defendant's reaction (that is what he actually did, rather than the fact that he lost his self control) may therefore be understandable in the sense that another person in his situation and the circumstances in which he found himself, might have reacted in the same or in a similar way.
- For present purposes the most significant feature of the third component is that the impact on the defendant of sexual infidelity is not excluded. The exclusion in section 55(6)(c) is limited to the assessment of the qualifying trigger. In relation to the third component, that is the way in which the defendant has reacted and lost control, "the circumstances" are not constrained or limited. Indeed, section 54(3) expressly provides that reference to the defendant's circumstances extends to "all" of the circumstances except those bearing on his general capacity for tolerance and self-restraint. When the third component of the defence is examined it emerges that, notwithstanding section 55(6)(c), account may, and in an appropriate case, should be taken of sexual infidelity.
- We must reflect briefly on the directions to be given by the judge to the jury. On one view they would require the jury to disregard any evidence relating to sexual infidelity when they are considering the second component of the defence, yet, notwithstanding this prohibition, would also require the same evidence to be addressed if the third component arises for consideration. In short, there will be occasions when the jury would be both disregarding and considering the same evidence. That is, to put it neutrally, counter intuitive.

**Diminished responsibility**

- The situation for the jury, and the judge, is yet further complicated if and when, as sometimes happens, the defence is inviting the jury to consider possible verdicts of manslaughter both on the grounds of loss of control and diminished responsibility. If the defendant is suffering from a recognised medical condition, for example, serious and chronic depression, the discovery that a partner has been sexually unfaithful may, and often will be said to, impair the defendant's ability to form a rational judgment and exercise self control. This situation is not all that uncommon. It arose in Clinton where one of the psychiatrists suggested that if Clinton was telling the truth, the effect of his "depressed state" would have been that he would have been more likely to lose self control following his wife's graphic account of sexual activity with other men and her taunts that he lacked the courage to commit suicide. Sexual infidelity may therefore require consideration when the jury is examining the diminished responsibility defence even when it has been excluded from consideration as a qualifying trigger for the purposes of the loss of control defence.

**Sexual infidelity – conclusion**

- We must now address the full extent of the prohibition against "sexual infidelity" as a qualifying trigger for the purposes of the loss of control defence. The question is whether or not sexual infidelity is wholly excluded from consideration in the context of features of the individual case which constitute a permissible qualifying trigger or triggers within section 55(3) and (4).
- We have examined the legislative structure as a whole. The legislation was designed to prohibit the misuse of sexual infidelity as a potential trigger for loss of control in circumstances in which it was thought to have been misused in the former defence of provocation. Where there is no other potential trigger, the prohibition must, notwithstanding the difficulties identified earlier in the judgment, be applied.
- The starting point is that it has been recognised for centuries that sexual infidelity may produce a loss of control in men, and, more recently in women as well as men who are confronted with sexual infidelity. The exclusion created by section 55(6) cannot and does not eradicate the fact that on occasions sexual infidelity and loss of control are linked, often with the one followed immediately by the other. Indeed on one view if it did not recognise the existence of this link, the policy decision expressly to exclude sexual infidelity as a qualifying trigger would be unnecessary.
- In section 54(1)(c) and (3) the legislation further acknowledges the impact of sexual infidelity as a potential ingredient of the third component of the defence, when all the defendant's circumstances fall for consideration, and when, although express provision is made for the exclusion of some features of the defendant's situation, the fact that he/she has been sexually betrayed is not. In short, sexual infidelity is not subject to a blanket exclusion when the loss of control defence is under consideration. Evidence of these matters may be deployed by the defendant and therefore the legislation proceeds on the basis that sexual infidelity is a permissible feature of the loss of control defence.
- The ambit of section 55(3) and (4) – the second component, the qualifying triggers – is clearly defined. Any qualifying trigger is subject to clear statutory criteria. Dealing with it broadly, to qualify as a trigger for the defendant's loss of control, the circumstances must be extremely grave and the defendant must be subject to a justifiable sense of having been seriously wronged. These are fact specific questions requiring careful assessment, not least to ensure that the loss of control defence does not have the effect of minimising the seriousness of the infliction of fatal injury. Objective evaluation is required and a judgment must be made about the gravity of the circumstances and the extent to which the defendant was seriously wronged, and whether he had a justifiable sense that he had been seriously wronged.
- Our approach has, as the judgment shows, been influenced by the simple reality that in relation to the day to day working of the criminal justice system events cannot be isolated from their context. We have provided a number of examples in the judgment. Perhaps expressed most simply, the man who admits, "I killed him accidentally", is never to be treated as if he had said "I killed him". That would be absurd. It may not be unduly burdensome to compartmentalise sexual infidelity where it is the only element relied on in support of a qualifying trigger, and, having compartmentalised it in this way, to disregard it. Whether this is so or not, the legislation imposes that exclusionary obligation on the court. However, to seek to compartmentalise sexual infidelity and exclude it when it is integral to the facts as a whole is not only much more difficult, but is unrealistic and carries with it the potential for injustice. In the examples we have given earlier in this judgment, we do not see how any sensible evaluation of the gravity of the circumstances or their impact on the defendant could be made if the jury, having, in accordance with the legislation, heard the evidence, were then to be directed to excise from their evaluation of the qualifying trigger the matters said to constitute sexual infidelity, and to put them into distinct compartments to be disregarded. In our judgment, where sexual infidelity is integral to and forms an essential part of the context in which to make a just evaluation whether a qualifying trigger properly falls within the ambit of subsections 55(3) and (4), the prohibition in section 55(6)(c) does not operate to exclude it.
- We have proceeded on the assumption that legislation is not enacted with the intent or purpose that the criminal justice system should operate so as to create injustice. We are fortified in this view by the fact that, although the material did not assist in the construction of section 55(6)(c), our conclusion is consistent not only with the views expressed in Parliament by those who were opposed in principle to the enactment of section 55(6)(c) but also with the observations of ministers who supported this limb of the legislation.
- Thus, for example, on 3 March 2009, Angela Eagle, speaking for the Government, said that the Government did not believe that "sexual infidelity ought to be a sufficient reason to reduce a murder charge to a finding of manslaughter … we do not accept that _that itself_ ought to lead to reducing a murder finding …" (our emphasis).
- On 9 November 2009, Claire Ward, speaking for the Government, said that the Government did not think it appropriate in this day and age "for a man to be able to say that he killed his wife as a result of sexual infidelity … if other factors come into play, the court will of course have an opportunity to consider them, but it will not be able to make the decision _exclusively_ on the ground of sexual infidelity". Answering a later question, she observed that the court would not be able to "take into account a set of circumstances in which the defendant killed someone in an attempt to punish … them or carry out some form of revenge _purely_ as a result of sexual infidelity". Later still she said "We are simply saying that sexual infidelity _in itself_ cannot and should not be … a defence for murder". Yet later she spoke of how important it was in relation to sexual infidelity "to set out the position precisely and uncompromisingly – namely that sexual infidelity is not the kind of thing done that is ever _sufficient on its own_ to found a successful plea of loss of control". Later she observed: "If something else is relied on as the qualifying trigger, any sexual infidelity that _forms part of the background_ can be considered, but it cannot be the trigger". (Our emphasis). This was the consistent pattern of her observations.
- In the House of Lords, Lord Bach on 26 October 2009, speaking for the Government, invited opponents of the prohibition in section 55(6)(c) to explain "why they consider that, when one person kills another, the fact that the deceased had been unfaithful to their killer should ever be enough …". Shortly afterwards, on 11 November 2009, he suggested that opponents of the provision were implicitly arguing that the defendant "should be able to make out a partial defence based on sexual infidelity, in and _of itself_, on the part of the victim. We simply do not agree…" (Our emphasis.)
- Our approach to the legislative structure is entirely consistent with these responses.
