---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:29 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:16 am
---

# R v Ray (Steven) [2017] EWCA Crim 1391

## Summary

The court determined that the interpretation in _[R. (on the application of Collins) v Secretary of State for Justice [2016] EWHC 33 (Admin), [2016] Q.B. 862, [2016] 1 WLUK 211](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0EB9E80BB9411E5A8DCCCFA2E99CC2C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9848c47a878f4f99a33125286d131976&contextData=(sc.Default))_ of the [Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 s.76(5A)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9848c47a878f4f99a33125286d131976&contextData=(sc.Default)) on self-defence in householder cases was correct. The court also gave guidance on summing up in such cases.

## Abstract

The court was required to determine issues concerning self-defence in "householder" cases as provided in the [Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 s.76(5A)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9848c47a878f4f99a33125286d131976&contextData=(sc.Default)).

In the instant case, the offender had stabbed his girlfriend's ex-partner during an altercation at her house. He admitted murder but contended that he acted in self-defence in accordance with s.76(5A). The trial judge had summed up the case in accordance with the decision in _[R. (on the application of Collins) v Secretary of State for Justice [2016] EWHC 33 (Admin), [2016] Q.B. 862, [2016] 1 WLUK 211](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE0EB9E80BB9411E5A8DCCCFA2E99CC2C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9848c47a878f4f99a33125286d131976&contextData=(sc.Default))_. He was convicted by a majority of murder.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

**Was s.76(5A) on the householder's defence correctly interpreted in Collins?** - Yes. The jury had first to determine the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be. Then, under [s.76(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1F307450261911DDA4CACD152F86E460/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9848c47a878f4f99a33125286d131976&contextData=(sc.Default)), it had to consider whether, in those circumstances, the degree of force used was reasonable. In determining that question in a householder case, the effect of s.76(5A) was that the jury had to first determine whether the force was grossly disproportionate. If it was, the degree of force was not reasonable and the defence of self-defence was not made out. If the force was not grossly disproportionate, then s.76(5A) required the jury to consider whether it was reasonable taking into account all the circumstances of the case as the defendant believed them to be. Disproportionate force which was short of grossly disproportionate was not, on the wording of s.76(5A), of itself the use of reasonable force. In such a case, where the defendant was a householder, the jury was entitled to form the view that the degree of force was either reasonable or unreasonable. Under s.76(6), in a non-householder case, the position was different in that the degree of force used was not to be regarded as reasonable if it was disproportionate. The effect of s.76(5A) was narrow. The offender's contention that provided the degree of force was not grossly disproportionate then it was necessarily reasonable could not stand, Collins approved (see paras [23-29](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Summing up** - The terms of s.76(5A) and s.76(6) distinguished in a householder case between a degree of force used which was disproportionate and a degree of force used which was unreasonable, but did not elucidate what that distinction was. It would not assist juries if they were presented with esoteric and conceptual distinctions between the meaning of "disproportionate" and "unreasonable". The jury's focus in the context of a householder case ultimately should be on what was reasonable or unreasonable in the circumstances. However, there could be circumstances where, when summing up in cases where the householder's defence was raised, the judge gave some colour to the issue of self-defence which arose. It could be helpful to explain in general terms that Parliament had conferred a greater latitude in cases of a householder in their own home. It could be pointed out that what might be an unreasonable degree of force when confronting an aggressive individual in a different situation might not be so when used by a householder confronting an intruder. It was particularly important that the jury assess a defendant's actions by reference to the circumstances in which they found themselves and as they believed them to be. However, it had to be made clear that the use of force that was grossly disproportionate, i.e. completely over the top, could never be reasonable. It would also generally be helpful to explain in such a case in everyday language the dilemma that would confront any householder when an intruder entered their house. If the jury did not regard the degree of force as being completely over the top, it had to carefully examine all the circumstances in determining whether the prosecution had proved that the degree of force was unreasonable. It would often be helpful to spell out the circumstances which the jury should consider in determining whether the degree of force was reasonable, such as the shock of encountering the intruder, the time of day, the presence of others, the desire to protect the house and its occupants (particularly children), the picking up of an object that would lawfully be to hand in the home and the intruder's conduct. Each of those might lead to the view that what was done, such as using a knife, which in a different context would be unreasonable, in the circumstances of a householder encountering an intruder might, in all the circumstances, be reasonable (paras [33-38](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
