---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:29 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:16 am
---

# R v Rejmankski [2017] EWCA Crim 2061

## Summary

The court considered the extent to which a mental disorder could be relevant to an assessment of "the circumstances of the defendant" when considering the partial defence of loss of control under the [Coroners and Justice Act 2009 s.54(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=440f0c46a24c4095bf289b133c3fcc6a&contextData=(sc.Default)).

## Abstract

In conjoined appeals, the court considered the extent to which a mental disorder could be relevant to an assessment of "the circumstances of the defendant" when considering the partial defence under the [Coroners and Justice Act 2009 s.54(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=440f0c46a24c4095bf289b133c3fcc6a&contextData=(sc.Default)) of loss of control.

The appellant (D1) in the first action appealed against his conviction for murder. He had been diagnosed as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder at the time of the offence. The first appellant (D2) in the second action sought permission to appeal against her conviction for murder and against a life sentence with a minimum term of 19 years. She was suffering from a personality disorder, with anti-social and emotionally unstable personality traits, at the time of the offence.

D1 and D2 both complained that the jury directions effectively deprived them of the defence of loss of control, which had been introduced by s.56 of the Act. Loss of control consisted of three components: the defendant's acts and omissions in doing, or being a party to, the killing had resulted from their loss of self-control; the loss of self-control had a qualifying trigger; and a person of the defendant's sex and age, with a normal degree of tolerance and self-restraint, and in the circumstances of the defendant, might have reacted in the same or a similar way. The focus of the arguments in the instant appeals had been on the effect of s.54(3), which provided that "in the circumstances of D" was a reference to all of the defendant's circumstances "other than those whose only relevance to D's conduct is that they bear on D's general capacity for tolerance or self-restraint".

## Held

Appeals dismissed, applications for permission to appeal refused.

**Loss of control/effect of s.54 and s.55** - The components were distinct and required separate consideration. The potential relevance of a mental disorder to each was fact-specific. It depended on the nature of the disorder, the effect it had on the defendant, and the facts of the case. The wording of s.54(1)(c) was clear. In assessing the third component, the defendant was to be judged against the standard of a person with a normal degree of tolerance and self-restraint. If, and insofar as, a personality disorder reduced the defendant's general capacity for tolerance or self-restraint, that was not a relevant consideration. It would not be even if the personality disorder was one of the “circumstances” of the defendant because it was relevant to the gravity of the qualifying trigger. Expert evidence about the impact of the disorder would be irrelevant and inadmissible as to whether it would have reduced the capacity for tolerance and self-restraint of the hypothetical person.

If a mental disorder had a relevance to the defendant's conduct other than a bearing on his general capacity for tolerance or self-restraint, it was not excluded by s.54(3) and the jury would be entitled to take it into account as one of the defendant's circumstances under s.54(1)(c). However, it was necessary to carefully identify the relevance of the mental disorder. It was not to be relied on to undermine the principle that the defendant's conduct was to be judged against “normal” standards. It followed that, if a disorder was relevant to the gravity of the qualifying trigger and evidence of the disorder was admitted in relation to that gravity, the jury would not also be entitled to take it into account insofar as it bore on the defendant's general capacity for tolerance and self-restraint. The disorder would be a relevant circumstance of the defendant, but would not be relevant to the question of the degree of tolerance and self-restraint exercised by the hypothetical person referred to in s.54(1)(c), _[Attorney General for Jersey v Holley [2005] UKPC 23, [2005] 2 A.C. 580, [2005] 6 WLUK 279](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69C05200E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=440f0c46a24c4095bf289b133c3fcc6a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _R. v McGrory (John Fairweather) [2013] EWCA Crim 2336_, _[R. v Wilcocks (Callum Paul) [2016] EWCA Crim 2043, [2017] 4 W.L.R. 39, [2016] 11 WLUK 96](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6903CFF0D3F311E6B9D7BDAFBD7D664C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=440f0c46a24c4095bf289b133c3fcc6a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Meanza (Michael Dean) [2017] EWCA Crim 445, [2017] 3 WLUK 581](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I591D2E902AA311E782FBA62C5DF581C2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=440f0c46a24c4095bf289b133c3fcc6a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed.

The most obvious example of when evidence of a mental disorder might be relevant to the defendant's circumstances was where the disorder was relevant to the **gravity of the qualifying trigger**, Holley and Wilcocks considered. The exclusionary effect of s.54(3) was consistent with, and reinforced by, the availability and scope of the partial defence of diminished responsibility in s.2 of the 1957 Act, as amended. Section 2 applied where a mental disorder substantially impaired the ability of the defendant to exercise self-control. The two defences could be presented together as alternatives. The law did not therefore ignore a mental disorder that, through no fault of a defendant, rendered them unable to exercise the degree of self-control of a “normal” person (see paras [12-30](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Instant cases** - The court applied those principles in refusing D1's appeal against conviction and D2's application for permission to appeal against conviction. D2 was granted permission to appeal against sentence, but her appeal was dismissed (paras [31-100](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
