---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:18 am
---

# R v Hughes [2013] UKSC 56

The defendant's act must be the 'substantial' cause of the prohibited harm. Lord Hughes and Lord Toulson said:

> “Where there are multiple legally effective causes, whether of a road traffic accident or of any other event, it suffices if the act or omission under consideration is a significant (or substantial) cause, in the sense that it is not de minimis or minimal. It need not be the only or the principal cause. It must, however, be a cause which is more than de minimis, more than minimal.”

## Summary

In order to give effect to the expression "causes … death … by driving", an unlicensed, disqualified or uninsured driver charged with an offence under the [Road Traffic Act 1988 s.3ZB](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I610AF6307D2211DB9833E1CC4921FF0C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b2e3ce2791344109bc88e6849128dad&contextData=(sc.Search)) had to be shown to have done something other than simply putting his vehicle on the road so that it was there to be struck. Some kind of fault in the manner of his driving was a necessary element of the offence.

## Abstract

The appellant (H) appealed against a decision (_[[2011] EWCA Crim 1508](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I30DBAEE09D2111E09B45D883AEA2A88A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b2e3ce2791344109bc88e6849128dad&contextData=(sc.Search))_) that, by virtue of the [Road Traffic Act 1988 s.3ZB](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I610AF6307D2211DB9833E1CC4921FF0C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b2e3ce2791344109bc88e6849128dad&contextData=(sc.Search)), he was criminally responsible for the death of a driver (D) who had crashed into him while under the influence of heroin, even though H's own driving had been completely faultless.

D had been driving erratically for some time, narrowly missing colliding with other vehicles. He rounded a bend on the wrong side of the road and crashed into H's vehicle. H tried to avoid the collision by steering to his left, but D took no avoiding action. It was accepted that H's driving had been faultless and that, on a common sense view, D was entirely responsible for his own death. H was, however, uninsured at the time, and driving under a provisional licence. Instead of being prosecuted for those offences, he was charged with causing D's death under s.3ZB. The trial judge accepted that H had not caused D's death, but the Court of Appeal, considering itself bound by _[R. v Williams (Jason John) [2010] EWCA Crim 2552, [2011] 1 W.L.R. 588, [2010] 11 WLUK 21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAE4A0D50E6D711DF8E96A9E358B8E515/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b2e3ce2791344109bc88e6849128dad&contextData=(sc.Search))_, ruled that he had caused the death because the offence did not require that there be anything wrong with the defendant's driving. The issue for determination was whether a driver caught by s.3ZB caused the death whenever he was on the road at the wheel and a fatal accident involving his vehicle occurred, or whether he only caused it if he did, or omitted to do, something connected to the control of his vehicle which was open to proper criticism and contributed in some more than minimal way to the death.

The Crown maintained that the words of the section were sufficiently clear to establish that the former was Parliament's intention, and that driving on the road without any right to be there was sufficient “fault” to justify the offence. H argued in favour of the application of principles of causation.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

Parliament might have intended to create an aggravated form of the offence of having no insurance or driving without a licence, but that raised the question whether the intention had been to attach criminal responsibility for a death to those whose driving had nothing to do with the death beyond being available on the road to be struck. The Crown's argument, when pressed to its logical limit, became unworkable, and represented double strict liability. Although a government consultation document produced in 2005 indicated that taking a vehicle on the road when disqualified was as negligent as substandard driving, it was clear that however culpable it might be to drive when uninsured, unlicensed, or disqualified, if the driving was of an acceptable standard, it could not be called negligent. Parliament could have legislated in terms which left it beyond doubt that a driver within s.3ZB was made guilty of causing death whenever a car that he was driving was involved in a fatal accident, but it had not adopted such language; instead it had used the expression "causes … death … by driving", which imported a concept of causation. There was a well-recognised distinction between conduct setting the stage for an occurrence and conduct which was instrumental in bringing about the occurrence, _[Galoo Ltd v Bright Grahame Murray [1994] 1 W.L.R. 1360, [1993] 12 WLUK 306](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IACAD31A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b2e3ce2791344109bc88e6849128dad&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered. The driving in both the instant case and in Williams fell within the latter category, but the question still remained whether it was a legally effective cause of the deaths. By the test of common sense, H had created the opportunity for his car to be run into by D, but it was a matter of the merest chance that H's car was what D hit. He might just as easily have hit a tree, which would have been a similar intervening event, yet it would not be said that the death had been caused by the planting of the tree. To label a person a criminal killer was of the greatest gravity. Parliament could legislate for harsh penalties, but it was not to be assumed to have done so unless such an interpretation of the statute was compelled. The rule of construction applicable to penal legislation was somewhat analogous to the principle of legality, _[R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Simms [2000] 2 A.C. 115, [1999] 7 WLUK 189](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I693385E0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=8b2e3ce2791344109bc88e6849128dad&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied. In the instant situation, Parliament had chosen not to adopt unequivocal language and, therefore, an intention to create the meaning contended for by the Crown could not be attributed to it. A defendant charged with an offence under s.3ZB had to be shown to have done something, or omitted to do something, by way of driving his vehicle so as to contribute in a more than minimal way to the death, Williams disapproved. It was impossible to pinpoint what type of "additional feature" of a defendant's driving might be required; the issue was further complicated by the possibility of the defendant making a "wrong movement" in the agony of the moment, or coming across an unexpected natural hazard. To draw fine distinctions or to attempt to foresee every possible scenario would make the law confusing, incoherent and unmanageable. Juries were to be directed that there had to be something open to proper criticism in the defendant's driving which contributed in some more than minimal way to the death (see paras [16-20, 23-33](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).
