---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:20 am
---

# R v Dawes, Hatter and Bower [2013] EWCA Crim 322

## Summary

In upholding three convictions for murder, the court considered the application of the loss of control defence in the [Coroners and Justice Act 2009 s.54](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.55](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) in the context of violence offered to or feared by a defendant. The qualifying trigger necessary for that defence under [s.54(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)), elaborated by [s.55(6)(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.55(6)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)), was not available to a defendant who had deliberately sought to provide himself with an excuse to use violence by inciting, or encouraging or manufacturing a situation for that purpose.

## Abstract

The court was required to determine three appeals against convictions for murder concerning the loss of control defence in the [Coroners and Justice Act 2009 s.54](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) and [s.55](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)).

The first appellant (D) had fatally stabbed his victim after an altercation when he found him asleep on a sofa with his wife. The judge decided that D did not qualify for the defence of loss of self-control because he had incited the violence offered to him by the victim, so that no qualifying trigger was available to him under s.55. The second appellant (H) had fatally stabbed his victim after an argument with her and the break-up of their relationship. The judge decided that the defence of loss of self-control should not be left to the jury because there was insufficient evidence to raise that as an issue. The third appellant (B) had known his victim as both were in a relationship with a prostitute (K). B had entered the victim's home intending to burgle him, and then beaten him to death. His raised the defence of loss of control, claiming to have used force on his victim because he was in fear of serious violence from him and because he had made hurtful remarks about K which were immensely provocative to him. The court had to determine the application of s.54 and s.55 to the issues raised in the appeals, in particular in the context of violence offered to or feared by a defendant.

## Held

Appeals dismissed.

(1) Sections 54 and 55 replaced the former provocation defence. When a person killed or was party to the killing of another person he was to be convicted not of murder but manslaughter if each of three distinct ingredients which comprised the defence were present. [Section 54(1)(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) required the killing to result from a loss of self-control, [s.54(1)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) required that there be a qualifying trigger, and [s.54(1)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF0224CD1DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) required that a person of the defendant's age and sex with a normal degree of tolerance and self-restraint might, in the circumstances, have acted in the same way. Section 55 elaborated the qualifying triggers. Under [s.55(6)(c)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) sexual infidelity was to be disregarded, _[R. v Clinton (Jon-Jacques) [2012] EWCA Crim 2, [2013] Q.B. 1, [2012] 1 WLUK 253](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID999A6304C2211E1A042C1E93BE2BAC2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Under [s.55(6)(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)), if the loss of self-control was attributable to a defendant's fear of serious violence from the victim against him or some other identified person, the qualifying trigger might be present. A further qualifying trigger applied under [s.55(6)(b)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF02273E0DA4211DE9AD491096115908F/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default)) if the loss of self-control was attributed to things said or done, which constituted circumstances of an extremely grave character, and caused the defendant to have a justifiable sense of being seriously wronged. Neither qualifying trigger in s.55(6)(a) and s.55(6)(b) was available to a defendant who had deliberately sought to provide himself with an excuse to use violence by inciting, or encouraging or manufacturing a situation for that purpose. The decision in _[R. v Johnson (Christopher Richard) [1989] 1 W.L.R. 740, [1989] 4 WLUK 222](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I504D29F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=96491311ad3c4835b0601c0bd9babeb5&contextData=(sc.Default))_, in which the court had rejected the submission that the mere fact that a defendant caused a reaction in others, which led him to lose his self-control, should result in the issue of provocation being outside a jury's consideration, had been decided in the context of the former provocation defence and no longer fully reflected the appropriate principle, Johnson disapproved. Provided the statutory conditions were met, loss of control should be left to the jury. However, the circumstances had to be extremely grave and the defendant's sense of being seriously wronged by them had to be justifiable. Those matters required objective assessment by the judge at the end of the evidence and, if the defence was permitted to stand, by the jury considering their verdict. Were it to be otherwise, it would mean that a qualifying trigger would be present if the defendant gave an account to the effect that the circumstances were extremely grave to him and caused him to have what he believed was a justifiable sense that he had been seriously wronged (see paras [48, 54-59, 61](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) In D's case, the judge's decision that the loss of control should not be left to the jury was fully justified. There was no sufficient evidence that D ever lost his self-control (para.[64](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) In H's case, the victim's death was a direct consequence of H's response to the breakdown of their relationship. There was no evidence to suggest that H had had any justifiable sense of being seriously wronged or that the fatal injuries were inflicted by him in consequence of loss of control (para.[65](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) B's victim had been entitled to say and do anything reasonable, including the use of force, to eject B, as a burglar, from his home and it would be absurd if his understandable response provided B with the remotest beginnings of a basis for suggesting that he had any justifiable sense of being wronged, let alone seriously wronged. One essential ingredient of the defence was, therefore, entirely absent (paras [66-67](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
