---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:18 am
---

# R v JM & SM (2012) EWCA Crim 2293

## Summary

In a case in which a doorman had been involved in an altercation with two aggressive individuals and had died as a result of a ruptured aneurysm, there was evidence from which a properly directed jury could conclude that a sober and reasonable bystander would have recognised that he was at sufficient risk of harm for the purposes of the offence of involuntary manslaughter.

## Abstract

The Crown appealed under the [Criminal Justice Act 2003 s.58](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6FF55C0E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=462b2ccc39ab423d949335de4435c70a&contextData=(sc.Default)) against a Crown Court ruling that it would not be open to a jury to convict the respondents (J and S) of manslaughter.

J and S had been charged with involuntary manslaughter and affray. The deceased (D), who was 40 and apparently fit, had worked as a nightclub doorman. Unbeknownst to anybody, he had a renal artery aneurysm. He died after becoming involved in an altercation with J and S in the course of his employment. J and S had begun a fight with D and other doormen on an elevated fire escape. The incident lasted for about two minutes and there was no evidence that D had thrown any punches or that he had been pushed or struck. What was clear was that he had quickly descended the fire escape and had died shortly after climbing back up, the aneurysm having ruptured. The Crown's case was that the rupture was caused by a sudden surge in D's blood pressure resulting from release of adrenalin into his bloodstream during the incident. Pursuant to _[R. v Carey (Claire Anne) [2006] EWCA Crim 17, [2006] Crim. L.R. 842, [2006] 1 WLUK 507](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I39C0EAA0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=462b2ccc39ab423d949335de4435c70a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, the trial judge directed himself that, to convict, the jury would have to be satisfied that J and S had committed an unlawful act; that the act was recognisably dangerous in relation to the characteristics of D apparent to them at the time; that it had caused or significantly contributed to his death; and that D had died as a result of the sort of physical harm that any reasonable and sober person would inevitably realise the act risked causing. He found that a jury could not be sure that a sober and reasonable bystander, having the knowledge that J and S did at the time, would inevitably realise that there was a risk that D would suffer an increase in blood pressure leading to an aneurysm rupture as a result of anything that occurred that night. For the purposes of the appeal it was accepted that the argument should be approached on the basis that J and S were involved in an affray in which the doormen were not the aggressors and which was a substantial cause of D's death. The issue was whether the judge had been right to hold that Carey required that the jury be satisfied that the victim died as a result of the sort of physical harm that any reasonable and sober person would inevitably realise the act in question risked causing.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

Unless it was appreciated that the level of danger required for the offence of involuntary manslaughter was not high, the reference to "dangerous" as part of the definition of involuntary manslaughter was liable to mislead. A reasonable and sober bystander did not have to recognise a risk of serious or potentially lethal harm. He would simply need to recognise that the act in question exposed the victim to a risk of "some harm", _[R. v Church (Cyril David) [1966] 1 Q.B. 59, [1965] 3 WLUK 88](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3A65DD30E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=462b2ccc39ab423d949335de4435c70a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. For the purposes of involuntary manslaughter, an affray could constitute an unlawful and dangerous act whether it took the form of fear created, or direct violence suffered, during the course of the incident. J and S accepted that the judge misdirected himself in requiring that the jury be satisfied that a reasonable and sober person would realise that there was a risk that the unlawful act would cause the sort of physical harm from which D in fact died. Such a requirement put an unjustified gloss on the ingredients of the offence. A requirement that the bystander had to appreciate the type of injury that might occur undermined the "some" harm principle in Church, and was not supported by Carey or _[R. v Dawson (Brian) (1985) 81 Cr. App. R. 150, [1985] 3 WLUK 113](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3F4210D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=462b2ccc39ab423d949335de4435c70a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Carey and Dawson considered. Since the decisions in Church and _[DPP v Newbury (Neil) [1977] A.C. 500, [1976] 5 WLUK 44](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AFFE510E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=462b2ccc39ab423d949335de4435c70a&contextData=(sc.Default))_, there was no requirement that the defendant should foresee any specific harm, or that the bystander should recognise the precise sort of harm that ensued, Newbury considered. What mattered was whether a reasonable and sober bystander would recognise that the defendant's act inevitably subjected the deceased to the risk of some harm. The decision in the instant case was confined to its facts: an affray in which D was personally involved, rather than an individual happening across a fight without becoming involved. Whether a reasonable and sober bystander would inevitably recognise a risk of physical harm in the form of shock would have to be resolved as a question of fact. There was, however, evidence from which a properly directed jury could conclude that a sober and reasonable bystander would readily have recognised that D was at risk of harm, and that the fatal injury was incurred during the incident or in its immediate aftermath while he was still subject to its effects (see paras [12-23](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).
