---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:19 am
---

# R v Ghosh, [1982] QB 1053

## Summary

The test for dishonesty under the [Theft Act 1968](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60709470E42311DAA7CF8F68F6EE57AB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default)) was both subjective and objective. In determining whether a defendant had acted dishonestly, a jury had first of all to decide whether, according to the ordinary standards of reasonable and honest people, what was done was dishonest; if it was not dishonest by those standards, that would be the end of the matter and the prosecution would fail (the objective test). If it was dishonest by those standards, then the jury had to consider whether the defendant himself had to have realised that what he was doing was by those standards dishonest (the subjective test). This case is the basis for the "Ghosh test".

## Abstract

The appellant (G) appealed against his conviction of four offences of dishonesty.

G had been a surgeon acting as a locum consultant at a hospital. It was alleged that he had falsely represented that he had himself carried out a surgical operation to terminate pregnancy or that money was due to himself or an anaesthetist for such an operation, when in fact the operation had been carried out by someone else or under the National Health Service provisions. G was charged with one offence of attempting to procure the execution of a cheque by deception contrary to the [Theft Act 1968 s.20(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF79CA50E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default)) and three offences of obtaining money by deception contrary to [s.15(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF747320E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default)). G's defence was that there was no deception in that he had been entitled to the money. On the issue of dishonesty, the judge directed the jury that they should apply contemporary standards of honesty and dishonesty in the context of all that they had heard in the case in deciding whether G had been dishonest. G was convicted on all four counts.

He appealed against his convictions on the ground that the judge had misdirected the jury as to the meaning of dishonesty.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) Under [s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF64BBB0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the Act, "dishonesty" characterised a state of mind, not a course of conduct, and if the mind of the accused was honest it could not be deemed dishonest merely because the jury would have regarded the course of conduct as dishonest. Accordingly, in determining whether the prosecution had proved that a defendant was acting dishonestly, a jury had first of all to decide whether according to the ordinary standards of reasonable and honest people what was done was dishonest; if it was not dishonest by those standards, that was the end of the matter and the prosecution failed. If, however, it was dishonest by those standards, then the jury had to consider whether the defendant himself had to have realised that what he was doing was by those standards dishonest. In most cases, where the actions were obviously dishonest by ordinary standards, there would be no doubt about it: it would be obvious that the defendant himself knew that he was acting dishonestly. It was dishonest for a defendant to act in a way which he knew ordinary people considered to be dishonest, even if he asserted or genuinely believed that he was morally justified in acting as he had, dictum in _[R. v McIvor (John Gerard) [1982] 1 W.L.R. 409, [1981] 11 WLUK 111](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I59B24110E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default))_ disapproved, _[R. v Feely (David) [1973] Q.B. 530, [1972] 12 WLUK 76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I436E2E50E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default))_ explained, _[Scott v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [1975] A.C. 819, [1974] 11 WLUK 97](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9ECC8800E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[R. v Landy (Harry) [1981] 1 W.L.R. 355, [1981] 1 WLUK 511](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I51BD5BC1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=9d54d35a971e4b78a80c688262654487&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered.

(2) In the instant case, once the jury had rejected G's account in respect of each count in the indictment (as they plainly had), the finding of dishonesty was inevitable, whichever of the tests of dishonesty was applied. If the judge had asked the jury to determine whether G might have believed that what he did was in accordance with the ordinary man's idea of honesty, the answer could only have been in the negative, once the jury had rejected G's explanation of what happened. G's convictions were, accordingly, safe.
