---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:17 am
---

# R v Matthews and Alleyne [2003] EWCA Crim 192

In this case, the trial judge had directed the jury to find that intention to kill was proved if they were satisfied that the defendant had appreciated that there was a virtual certainty of death. The Court of Appeal did not consider that Lord Steyn had changed the law, and said the foresight of virtual certainty was still only evidence of intention:

> '… the law has not yet reached a definition of intent in murder in terms of appreciation of a virtual certainty.' (Per Rix LJ.)

---

## Summary

Whilst a defendant's appreciation of the virtual certainty of the victim's death was insufficient in itself to establish the mens rea for murder, if the defendant appreciated that death was a virtual certainty unless some attempt was made to save the victim, and the defendant had no intention of saving him, this would found the necessary intention for murder.

## Abstract

M and A appealed against their convictions for the murder of J. Two other men, D and C, were arrested with the appellants. A, M and D were convicted of robbery, kidnapping and murder and C was acquitted of robbery and murder having pleaded guilty to kidnapping and manslaughter. J was assaulted and robbed by A and D outside a night club. His bank card was stolen. The attackers left and M and A tried unsuccessfully to obtain money from a cash point with J's card. J had lost his glasses in the attack and was trying to obtain help by flagging down a car when the attackers passed by. J was forced into C's car and was driven to a bridge and thrown into the river below. J had informed the attackers that he could not swim and subsequently drowned. A and M maintained that they had been dropped off after the assault and knew nothing about subsequent events. However, D and C gave a detailed account of how events involving all four defendants took place at the bridge. The Crown's case was that the defendants had been determined to silence J by drowning him to prevent him identifying them as robbers, or appreciated that at the time J was thrown from the bridge his death was a virtual certainty. D, the only defendant to give evidence of participation in the events on the bridge, expressly said that J's death had been unintended and accidental. The appellants contended that the judge's direction on intent, which was his amended form of a Woollin direction, was put as a substantive rule of law rather than as a rule of evidence and was therefore a misdirection.

Held, dismissing the appeals, that the law had not yet reached a definition of intent in murder in terms of appreciation of virtual certainty. Woollin was not regarded as yet reaching or laying down a substantive rule of law, _[R. v Woollin (Stephen Leslie) [1999] 1 A.C. 82, [1998] 7 WLUK 448](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I746B6130E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=70674da44b8545a4a57a4adb47ee5f97&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. Woollin as a whole found that _[R. v Nedrick (Ransford Delroy) [1986] 1 W.L.R. 1025, [1986] 7 WLUK 116](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5B43B681E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=70674da44b8545a4a57a4adb47ee5f97&contextData=(sc.Default))_ had been derived from existing case law at the time and the critical direction in Nedrick had been approved subject to the change of the word “infer” to “find”, Nedrick considered. In those circumstances the judge's direction went further than the law permitted him to go by redrafting the Nedrick and Woollin direction into a form where the jury were directed to find the necessary intent proved provided they were satisfied in the case of any defendant that there was an appreciation of the virtual certainty of death. The proper direction should have been in the terms that the jury were "not entitled to find the necessary intention unless they felt sure that death, or serious bodily harm, was a virtual certainty as a result of the defendant's actions and that the defendant appreciated that this was the case". However once what was required was an appreciation of virtual certainty of death, and not some lesser foresight of merely probable consequences, there was very little to choose between a rule of evidence and one of substantive law. On the particular facts of this case, reflected in the judge's directions, the question of the appellants' intentions to save J from drowning highlighted the irresistible nature of the inference or finding of intent to kill. If the jury were sure that the appellants appreciated the virtual certainty of J's death when they threw him off the bridge and also that they then had no intention of saving him from such death, it was impossible to see how a jury could not have found that the appellants intended J to die. The jury could not possibly have misunderstood the judge's directions to them. He had throughout his summing up constantly repeated the need for an intent to kill. Thus, whilst the judge's direction had amounted to a rule of substantive law, that was a misdirection, that misdirection was immaterial.
