---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:17 am
---

# R v Klineberg and Marsden [1999] 1 Cr App R 427

FACTS: The defendants (K and M) set up a company to buy a timeshare development under construction in Lanzarote and to sell the timeshares. The purchasers were told that their money would be paid to a stake-holding trust company to be held on trust until the development had been completed and was ready for occupation. Various purchasers paid a total of £500,000 for timeshares of which only £233 was paid to the trust company. The rest was paid into the company's bank account and 'lost' when the company went into liquidation. K and M were convicted of ten counts of theft. They appealed against their convictions, arguing that once the money was paid into the company's account, it no longer belonged to the customers.

HELD: The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal in part and upheld six of the ten convictions. They stated that K and M's express assurances that the money would be safeguarded by payment to a stake-holding trust company meant that they were under a legal obligation to do just that. The prosecution had proved that on six counts that the defendants were under an obligation to deal with the money in a particular way. Accordingly, under **s 5(3)** the money would be deemed to belong to the purchasers. The legal obligation need not require the defendant to retain and deal with the actual property concerned. It is enough that there is an obligation to deal with the proceeds of the property.

---

K was in charge of the English office of PCL, a company which had taken over the marketing of a time share complex in Lanzarote and which had undertaken to receive purchase monies for transmission to TTI, the appointed trustee/stakeholder. Although PCL received and paid into its own bank account over half a million pounds in purchase monies received in cash, by cheque or by bank transfer, only GBP 223 was passed on to TTI. Some of the purchasers were told that the independent trusteeship would operate through TTI, but others were told it would operate through a firm of solicitors. K appealed against conviction on 10 counts of theft, arguing in reliance on _[R. v Preddy (John Crawford) [1996] A.C. 815, [1996] 7 WLUK 158](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I60F03270E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c08e9bf29bbd45a2b6351805d7cae976&contextData=(sc.Default))_ that, once PCL had paid the purchase monies, received by whatever means, into its own account, the monies were replaced by a chose in action in the form of a credit balance belonging to PCL, and were not "property belonging to another" capable of being stolen for the purposes of the [Theft Act 1968 s.1](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF64BBB0E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c08e9bf29bbd45a2b6351805d7cae976&contextData=(sc.Default)) .

Held, allowing the appeal in part, that, where a party had been induced to contract, or had contracted, on the basis that his money would be protected by a trusteeship, there was a legal obligation, in terms of s.5(3) of the Act, to deal with the money or proceeds in a particular way and, accordingly, it was to be deemed "property belonging to another" for the purposes of s.1. However, the prosecution had to show that there had been a breach of that obligation in each case and, whilst such a breach could be established in relation to those purchasers who contracted on the basis that their money would be passed to TTI, the convictions relating to those purchasers who had contracted on the basis that their money would be transmitted to the firm of solicitors would be quashed.
