---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:19 am
---

# R v Farnon [2015] EWCA Crim 351

## Summary

A judge had correctly directed the jury regarding the issues of intent and foreseeability in relation to unlawful act manslaughter.

## Abstract

The appellant young offenders appealed against their convictions for manslaughter and against sentences of three years' detention.

The appellants, aged 14 and 16 respectively at the time of the offences, had set a fire in a derelict building. A homeless person in the building was killed. Neither appellant gave evidence at trial but each had given an account in interview. The first appellant, who had a low IQ and poor reasoning skills, said that he had known that people slept there but had believed no one to be there at the time. The second appellant said that she had thought there was no one in the building. The judge directed the jury that it had to be proved that, when starting the fire, the appellants had foreseen or contemplated the possibility that someone might be in the building, and that the unlawful act had to be a dangerous one, objectively viewed. The directions highlighted the fact that, whereas the offences of manslaughter and arson being reckless as to whether life was endangered both required subjective foreseeability, the test in respect of manslaughter as to whether the act was dangerous was an objective one. The appellants were convicted of arson, but acquitted of arson being reckless as to whether life was endangered.

The appellants submitted that the objective test regarding dangerousness should have been adapted to take into account the foreseeability of persons of similar ages to them and, in the case of the first appellant, his mental capacity. They argued that their acquittal of arson being reckless as to whether life was endangered showed that the jury found that they did not have the subjective appreciation of the risk of harm to any person.

## Held

Appeals against conviction dismissed, appeals against sentence allowed.

(1) For unlawful act manslaughter, two elements had to be carefully differentiated: the requisite state of mind and the requirement of dangerousness in relation to the unlawful act. It was established that in determining whether an unlawful act was dangerous, the test was objective, _[R. v Larkin (Henry) [1943] K.B. 174, [1942] 12 WLUK 32](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I51CAF050E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c4fa4cbb141447a9b6bfc3977aba719c&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[R. v Church (Cyril David) [1966] 1 Q.B. 59, [1965] 3 WLUK 88](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3A65DD30E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c4fa4cbb141447a9b6bfc3977aba719c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[DPP v Newbury (Neil) [1977] A.C. 500, [1976] 5 WLUK 44](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AFFE510E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c4fa4cbb141447a9b6bfc3977aba719c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. In applying that test, the knowledge of the circumstances attributed to the bystander were the circumstances known to the defendant, _[R. v Watson (Clarence Archibald) [1989] 1 W.L.R. 684, [1989] 5 WLUK 334](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6F716C60E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c4fa4cbb141447a9b6bfc3977aba719c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The judge had correctly directed the jury on that point (see paras [17-22](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). With regard to the mental element required, the act which constituted the crime was malicious damage to the building and the judge had directed the jury that it had to be sure that the appellants had either intended that damage or were subjectively reckless. The judge then said that the prosecution had to prove that the appellants had foreseen or contemplated the possibility that someone might be in the building. The first direction required the mens rea of the unlawful act; the second direction went further than was required, as it stated the law more favourably to the appellants. There had been no misdirection on the established law adverse to the appellants, _[R. v Lamb (Terence Walter) [1967] 2 Q.B. 981, [1967] 6 WLUK 79](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I51ADCB61E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c4fa4cbb141447a9b6bfc3977aba719c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Newbury followed (paras [23-27](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (2) The issue regarding adapting the objective test was one where the law was clearly established. The jury had been directed to consider whether the appellants had subjectively appreciated the risk of damage and the risk that someone would be in the building. It was clear from the jury's manslaughter verdict that it must have found that the appellants had appreciated both risks, but from the arson verdict that it must have concluded that the appellants had not appreciated the risk of endangering the life of any such person. It would appear from the facts of the case that the appellants must therefore have appreciated the risk of some harm to a person from the setting of the fire, but not harm to the extent of endangering life. It was not clear whether the verdict would have been different if the requirement in respect of the dangerous act was modified so that the subjective realisation of the appellants of some harm was required, _[R. v G [2003] UKHL 50, [2004] 1 A.C. 1034, [2003] 10 WLUK 396](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I46CFF6F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=c4fa4cbb141447a9b6bfc3977aba719c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. It was for Parliament to determine whether the long-established law needed to be changed in the light of various recommendations made by the Law Commission or whether a further examination by the Law Commission was needed (paras [28-33](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). (3) The judge concluded that it was not possible to distinguish between the appellants when sentencing them. The sentences were not manifestly excessive. However, the second appellant had made very significant progress at the secure facility in which she was detained. When she reached 18 she would normally be moved from the under-18 facility operated under the supervision of the Youth Justice Board. However, if she only had a short period of her sentence to complete she would remain at that facility and be supported by the Youth Offending Service Team on release. It was in the interests of rehabilitating her and protecting society from the commission of further offences by her that she was not moved. Her sentence would be quashed and replaced by a 24-month detention and training order. As the culpability of the appellants was the same, parity required that the same course should be taken in respect of the first appellant (paras [34-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
