---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:28 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:20 am
---

# R v Dica [2004] QB 1257

## Summary

A person could be convicted of inflicting grievous bodily harm if, knowing that he was suffering from a serious sexual disease, he recklessly transmitted that disease through consensual sexual intercourse to a person who was ignorant of, and therefore unlikely to have consented to, the risk of infection.

## Abstract

The appellant (D) appealed against his conviction of two offences of causing grievous bodily harm contrary to the [Offences against the Person Act 1861 s.20](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0BF9A7E1E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e58829ead428490f8d0ce8d34891737c&contextData=(sc.Default)) . After learning that he was HIV positive, D began a sexual relationship with the first complainant (L), after which she was diagnosed as HIV positive. D subsequently began a sexual relationship with the second complainant (C). C too was thereafter diagnosed as HIV positive. Both complainants had consented to unprotected sex with D, but the Crown's case was that neither would have consented had they known of D's condition. The Crown did not allege that D had deliberately set out to infect the complainants, but rather that, knowing that he was infected, he had been reckless as to whether they might become infected. D alleged that that both complainants knew that he was HIV positive but were, nevertheless, willing to have sexual intercourse with him. At the close of the Crown's case, the trial judge ruled that, notwithstanding the decision in _[R. v Clarence (Charles James) (1888) 22 Q.B.D. 23, [1888] 11 WLUK 21](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3A7175F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e58829ead428490f8d0ce8d34891737c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , it was open to the jury to convict D, Clarence having been undermined and providing no guidance; and that, whether or not the complainants knew of D's condition, their consent was irrelevant and provided no defence. D chose not to give evidence, and the issue of whether the complainants had consented to sexual intercourse with knowledge of D's condition was not left to the jury. D argued that the judge's rulings were wrong in law.

Held, allowing the appeal, that

(1) the issues arising were not confined to HIV but applied to all sexually transmitted diseases. The judge had been correct that Clarence was no longer authoritative in relation to the ambit of s.20 of the Act in the context of sexually transmitted disease, and it was open to the jury to convict D of the offences alleged in the indictment. The reasoning in Clarence , which led the majority in that case to decide that a conviction under s.20 should be quashed, had no continuing application, Clarence overruled in part. Even when no physical violence had been applied directly or indirectly to the victim's body, an offence under s.20 might be committed, _[R. v Ireland (Robert Matthew) [1998] A.C. 147, [1997] 7 WLUK 529](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4DA7AC70E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e58829ead428490f8d0ce8d34891737c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed.

(2) On the Crown's case the question was whether consent to sexual intercourse, given in ignorance of the fact of D's condition, necessarily amounted to consent to the risk of being infected by him. Given the long term nature of their relationships with D, there was no reason for the complainants to think that they were running any risk of infection, and they were not consenting to such risk. On that basis there would be no consent sufficient in law to provide D with a defence to a charge under s.20. Clarence was no longer authority for the suggestion that consensual sexual intercourse of itself was to be regarded as consent to the risk of consequent disease.

(3) The judge should not have withdrawn from the jury the issue of whether the complainants had consented to sexual intercourse with D knowing of his condition. As a general rule, unless the activity was lawful, the consent of the victim to the deliberate infliction of serious bodily injury did not provide any defence, and serious violence was not lawful simply because it enabled the perpetrator or the victim to achieve sexual gratification, _[R. v Brown (Anthony Joseph) [1994] 1 A.C. 212, [1993] 3 WLUK 189](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DEA0F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e58829ead428490f8d0ce8d34891737c&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. However, it did not follow that consensual acts of sexual intercourse were unlawful merely because there was a known risk to health of one or other participant. Modern society did not criminalise those who willingly accepted the risks taken by adults consenting to sexual intercourse. Interference of that kind with personal autonomy could only be made by Parliament. The questions of whether the defendant was reckless, and whether the victim consented to the risk of a sexually transmitted disease were questions of fact and were case specific. A retrial would be ordered.
