---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:29 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:40:13 am
---

# Wingate v SRA [2018] EWCA Civ 366

## Summary

A judge had been entitled to find that a solicitor who had entered into a sham funding agreement for his firm had lacked integrity and was manifestly incompetent. The Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal had been entitled to find that another solicitor had acted dishonestly by deploying in settlement negotiations a backdated notice of funding in respect of ATE insurance.

## Abstract

In the first appeal, two solicitors (W and E) appealed against the High Court's reversal of their acquittals by the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal. In the second appeal, the Solicitors Regulation Authority appealed against the High Court's reversal of findings of misconduct against another solicitor (M).

W and E were the partners in a small firm. W concentrated on management; E concentrated on litigation. The firm had financial difficulties. A litigation funder agreed to lend it £900,000. W signed a funding agreement which did not reflect the parties' true agreement. The firm's representatives told him that the agreement would later be replaced with a less restrictive agreement. That never happened. The firm failed to repay the loan. The funder's investors suffered losses. The SRA alleged that, in accepting the monies, W and E had failed to act with integrity, contrary to the SRA's Code of Conduct Principle 2, and had been manifestly incompetent, thus failing to behave in a way that maintained the public's trust, contrary to Principle 6. It also alleged that W had acted dishonestly. The tribunal acquitted the solicitors. The SRA appealed, but abandoned the dishonesty allegation. The judge found that E had not lacked integrity, but otherwise reversed the acquittals.

M had arranged ATE insurance regarding planned litigation. In order to recover the ATE premium under any subsequent costs order, notice of the premium had to be served on the defendant before 1 April 2013. The litigation was settled in 2014 and M claimed the premium as part of his costs. He found that no notice had been sent in time, and created a backdated notice and covering letter. The SRA charged him with breaches of Principles 2 and 6 in creating and deploying the documents, and additionally alleged dishonesty regarding the deployment. The tribunal found the allegations proved, but on appeal the judge held the decision to have alleged dishonesty in the deployment, but not in the documents' creation, was illogical and confusing.

## Held

Appeals allowed in part.

**Honesty, integrity and manifest incompetence -** The test for dishonesty regarding criminal and civil liability was objective, although the defendant's state of mind and their conduct were relevant to whether they had acted dishonestly, _[Ivey v Genting Casinos UK Ltd (t/a Crockfords Club) [2017] UKSC 67, [2018] A.C. 391, [2017] 10 WLUK 580](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D169600B96C11E7A68BFC577B65FE9C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=03593ade78eb4cc48c309dad8ff267dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (see para.[94](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment). Integrity was a broader concept than honesty, _[Williams v Solicitors Regulation Authority [2017] EWHC 1478 (Admin), [2017] 6 WLUK 422](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2A7C6ED0568011E78A03925B8CE4D7DB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=03593ade78eb4cc48c309dad8ff267dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ approved. In professional codes of conduct, "integrity" expressed the higher standards society and professions expected from professionals. It connoted adherence to the ethical standards of one's profession. It involved more than mere honesty (paras [95-103](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). Manifest incompetence was one of many forms of conduct which would undermine public confidence in the legal profession. A solicitor acting carelessly, but with integrity, would breach Principle 6 if his conduct went beyond professional negligence, _[Iqbal v Solicitors Regulation Authority [2012] EWHC 3251 (Admin), [2012] 7 WLUK 563](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4376B790D15311E1BD90B5EBEA3E51A2/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=03593ade78eb4cc48c309dad8ff267dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Solicitors Regulation Authority v Libby [2017] EWHC 973 (Admin), [2017] A.C.D. 81, [2017] 5 WLUK 34](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I80184CB030A611E7A31BE668D3711B6A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=03593ade78eb4cc48c309dad8ff267dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [104-106](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**First appeal: had W acted manifestly incompetently and without integrity?** It was not the case that, once dishonesty was no longer alleged, the judge could not hold that the funding agreement was a sham. The agreement bore no relationship to the true arrangements; it was a sham. For W to honestly but foolishly go along with that arrangement was manifest incompetence, _[Bryant v Law Society [2007] EWHC 3043 (Admin), [2009] 1 W.L.R. 163, [2007] 12 WLUK 667](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB9926FA0C00A11DCA7F297C84ED85A84/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=03593ade78eb4cc48c309dad8ff267dd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Iqbal applied. No competent solicitor could believe that such a sham agreement would adequately safeguard the funder's investors (paras [109-113](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The judge had correctly applied an objective test to the question of integrity and had considered his actions, knowledge and state of mind, Ivey applied. Although W had acted honestly, and although members of the public could act as W had and say they were acting with integrity a solicitor was not entitled to say that (paras [118-123](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**First appeal: had E been manifestly incompetent?** The tribunal had found that E had made adequate inquiries as to the loan. The judge had not been entitled to go behind that finding. E had failed to read the funding agreement, which had been careless or negligent, but he had not been manifestly incompetent (paras [124-131](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**First appeal: High Court costs -** It was not unjust for the SRA to recover costs if it successfully appealed against acquittal. When the parties came to the Administrative Court, they entered a conventional costs shifting regime. While solicitors were rarely insured against the costs of disciplinary proceedings, such considerations should not prevent an otherwise appropriate costs order being made (paras [135-137](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Second appeal: integrity and dishonesty -** The judge had wrongly held that lack of integrity meant the same as dishonesty. Integrity was broader than honesty (para.[139](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Second appeal: logic of SRA case -** The SRA case was not illogical. Once M had created the documents, it was not inevitable that he would deploy them. The SRA had been entitled to limit its dishonesty allegations to the deployment (paras [152-154](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). A statement before the tribunal by the SRA's counsel that M was "fortunate" not to have been charged with dishonesty in relation to the documents' creation had not prejudiced the defence. Although prosecutors should not generally make such statements, the instant context was unusual. M had been complaining about the failure to allege dishonesty on the creation counts; counsel had been responding to that complaint. The tribunal had had in mind the distinctions between the counts; the single mention of M being "fortunate" regarding the creation counts could not have affected the decisions on the deployment count (paras [156-160](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
