---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:30 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:39:56 am
---

# Nazari v Solicitors Regulation Authority

## Summary

The Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal had not erred in striking-off a solicitor from the Roll of Solicitors following his conviction for using a parking device with intent to deceive contrary to the [Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 Pt IX s.115(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I628CD301E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f332652365d34c7b881ef763eb31c292&contextData=(sc.Search)).

## Abstract

The appellant appealed against an order of the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal that he be struck off the Roll of Solicitors.

On nine occasions in 2018, the appellant had used a blue badge belonging to his disabled son to park close to his own workplace. He was found guilty on three counts of using a parking device with intent to deceive contrary to the [Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 Pt IX s.115(1)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I628CD301E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f332652365d34c7b881ef763eb31c292&contextData=(sc.Search)) and was fined £1,500. He was referred to the tribunal which found that the appellant had breached Principles 2 and 6 of the SRA Principles 2011 and had acted dishonestly when seeking to deceive parking enforcement officers into believing that he had the right to use the blue badge on the occasions in question. The tribunal considered all the mitigating circumstances and addressed the relevant caselaw when considering sanction. It did not find the circumstances of the appellant's case to be exceptional and concluded that "the repeated nature of the offending and the limited insight demonstrated by the [appellant] led the Tribunal to the conclusion that there was nothing that would justify a lesser sanction than a strike-off".

The appellant submitted that the tribunal (1) had erred in refusing his application for an adjournment; (2) ought to have looked behind the conviction; (3) had erred in treating the issue of deception as if it were the same as the ordinary form of dishonesty; (4) was wrong to strike him off the Roll of Solicitors as the case involved exceptional circumstances. The appellant further submitted that a notice sent by a SRA investigator which recommended a financial penalty, without referral to the tribunal, gave rise to a legitimate expectation that he would not be referred to the tribunal and that he would not receive a more severe sanction than a fine.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

**Refusal of adjournment application -** The tribunal's decision to refuse the adjournment was lawful. The primary reason for the application was the appellant's difficulties in securing legal representation. However, he had had sufficient time to instruct a suitable legal representative whose fees he could afford. The tribunal was entitled to apply the general rule in the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal Guidance Note: Adjournments para.6(d) which provided that inability to secure representation would not justify an adjournment. Furthermore, medical evidence which the appellant had relied upon in support of his adjournment application was inadequate and gave no indication as to how any of his medical conditions might impact on his ability to attend the tribunal (see paras 36-43 of judgment).

**Failure to go behind conviction** - There were sound public policy reasons why criminal convictions were held to constitute conclusive proof of guilt in subsequent proceedings, _[Hunter v Chief Constable of the West Midlands [1982] A.C. 529, [1981] 11 WLUK 188](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC5216AD0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f332652365d34c7b881ef763eb31c292&contextData=(sc.Search))_ followed. The factors relating to the circumstances of the offence, on which the appellant relied, were mitigating factors taken into account by the recorder when sentencing. They did not amount to exceptional circumstances. The fact that the appellant could have been charged with a lesser offence did not amount to exceptional circumstances (para.55).

**Deception not distinguished from dishonesty** - The tribunal correctly directed itself in law and made findings and reached conclusions which it was entitled to reach on the evidence. It clearly appreciated that this was an offence of deception, and correctly applied the test for dishonesty to the facts of the offence (para.60).

**Striking off** - The tribunal correctly directed itself in law, in accordance with the leading cases on exceptional circumstances, _[Solicitors Regulation Authority v Sharma [2010] EWHC 2022 (Admin), [2010] 5 WLUK 417](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DFEDC9162EC11DF90D1FBCC4FBD8FD9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f332652365d34c7b881ef763eb31c292&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[Solicitors Regulation Authority v James [2018] EWHC 3058 (Admin), [2018] 4 W.L.R. 163, [2018] 11 WLUK 169](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID878A870E7F511E8AB6BA42DD0CA63CB/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=f332652365d34c7b881ef763eb31c292&contextData=(sc.Search))_ applied. It also directed itself in accordance with the "Guidance Note on Sanctions" and took full account of the Recorder's sentencing remarks. It correctly applied the principle in James that the most significant factor in the evaluation of exceptional circumstances was "the nature and extent of the dishonesty" and was entitled to find that the appellant's misconduct, which led to a criminal conviction, harmed the reputation of the profession and undermined the public's trust in it. Its conclusion that "the misconduct was aggravated by the dishonesty and the fact that the offences had been deliberate, calculated and continued over a period of time" was one which was clearly open to it on the evidence. The tribunal carefully considered all the relevant factors, including those which were in the appellant's favour. Its conclusion that striking off was appropriate and proportionate could not be said to be wrong (paras 64-71).

**Legitimate expectation** - It was clear from the terms of the investigator's report and covering letter, and the statutory context in which they were sent, that it was only a recommendation, not a decision. Therefore, the report and the letter were not clear and unambiguous statements, devoid of relevant qualification, which were capable of giving rise to a legitimate expectation on the part of the appellant that he would not be referred to the tribunal, and that he would not receive a more severe sanction than a fine. No legitimate expectation had been established. Furthermore, there was no procedural unfairness; the appellant had had ample opportunity to consider and respond to the allegation of dishonesty, with the benefit of legal advice (paras 95, 99).
