---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:52 am
---

# Al Nehayan v Kent [2018] EWHC 333 (Comm)

## Summary

The test for finding duress, such as to entitle a party to rescind a contract, should incorporate the elements of the offence of blackmail transposed into objective requirements. A demand coupled with a threat to commit a lawful act would be illegitimate if (a) there were no reasonable grounds for the demand and (b) reasonable people would not consider the threat to be a proper means of reinforcing the demand.

## Abstract

The claimant claimed from the defendant sums allegedly due under a promissory note and an agreement made following the failure of a joint business venture. The defendant counterclaimed for an account of profits or damages.

The claimant had invested in the defendant's hotel business in Greece. By 2012 the business was verging on collapse. The claimant decided to separate his interest from the defendant's. A "framework agreement" provided for demerger of the business, including transfer to the claimant of the company (Investors) that owned the hotels, and contained undertakings and indemnities given by the defendant. Under a promissory note, the defendant agreed to pay the claimant €5.4m in respect of his capital contribution. That sum and others were unpaid. The claimant later sold Investors. The defendant alleged that his consent to the agreement and the note was obtained by unfair means, including threats of physical violence and economic duress. He alleged that the claimant had refused to consent to sell to a potential buyer.

## Held

Judgment accordingly.

**Promissory note -** The defendant had refused to pay. The claimant had accepted that renunciation of contractual obligations. He was therefore entitled to claim as damages the sums payable under the note, _[Hochster v De La Tour 118 E.R. 922, [1853] 6 WLUK 148](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB2437A10E57211DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (see paras [93-94](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Framework agreement -** A provision whereby the defendant was to pay Investors' operational debts would be construed as an undertaking by the defendant to the claimant to procure payment of sums equivalent to the operational debts to Investors, while the claimant owned that company. All such payments had been funded. That undertaking had not been breached (paras [97-104](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). A clause requiring the defendant to indemnify the claimant against Investors' other debts would be construed as a promise to pay the claimant the amount of any additional liability which, while he owned the company, was found to have existed at the date of the agreement. No such liabilities had been shown to exist (paras [106-123](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). A provision stating that the defendant represented that the Greek government was to provide a grant to Investors, and requiring him to indemnify the claimant if Investors did not receive the grant, was construed as an indemnity to Investors while the claimant owned it. The grant had not been paid, but it had not been shown that it would have been paid while the claimant owned Investors (paras [124-135](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Counterclaim: did claimant owe defendant [[fiduciary duties]]?** No. Fiduciary duties typically arose where one person was entrusted with the affairs of another, _[Bristol & West Building Society v Mothew (t/a Stapley & Co) [1998] Ch. 1, [1996] 7 WLUK 396](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7A914851E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed, _[Murad v Al-Saraj [2005] EWCA Civ 959, [2005] W.T.L.R. 1573, [2005] 7 WLUK 945](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I096CA1F0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Ross River Ltd v Waveley Commercial Ltd [2012] EWHC 81 (Ch), [2012] 1 WLUK 490](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I91000AD047B411E1B7CCAB3F0207F5DF/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The claimant had not undertaken to act for the defendant (paras [159-166](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Counterclaim: claimant's contractual duties to defendant -** The parties' relationship had been one in which they expected of each other greater co-operation than ordinary commercial parties. The venture had been intended as a long-term collaboration. It was based on personal friendship. It was a relational contract; the implication of a duty of good faith was essential to give effect to their reasonable expectations, _[Yam Seng Pte Ltd v International Trade Corp Ltd [2013] EWHC 111 (QB), [2013] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 1321, [2013] 2 WLUK 40](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0B6089E06F2711E28BB5CD2C4EB00C9C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (paras [167-174](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Counterclaim: duress and breach of contract -** _[Times Travel (UK) Ltd v Pakistan International Airlines Corp [2017] EWHC 1367 (Ch), [2017] 6 WLUK 255](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6EEA835051B611E7A678C67DE1039C39/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ had applied the test for duress stated in Chitty on Contracts (32nd ed) that a threat to commit an otherwise lawful act could be improper if coupled with a demand going substantially beyond what was legitimate. That approach was correct, Times Travel applied. However, the test could be made more precise by transposing the elements of the offence of blackmail into objective requirements: a demand coupled with a threat to commit a lawful act would be illegitimate if (a) there were no reasonable grounds for the demand and (b) reasonable people would not consider the threat to be a proper means of reinforcing the demand. Where pressure involved a threat of violence, it was sufficient that the threat was "a" reason for entering into the contract. However, for economic duress, it was necessary to show that the contract would not have been made "but for" the pressure (paras [184-191](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The claimant's representatives had breached his duty of good faith by using his position of co-ownership to block the deal with the buyer unless the defendant made payments to which he had no right. That also amounted to duress. The claimant's representatives had had no reasonable grounds for demanding the promissory note. The demand was illegitimate. It was reinforced by threats of violence. The pressure amounted to blackmail (paras [201-216](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")). The defendant was therefore entitled to rescind the agreement, but he had not sought to do so. The bases on which the agreement could be rescinded also gave rise to a damages claim. Duress would not necessarily give rise to tortious liability, _[Universe Tankships Inc of Monrovia v International Transport Workers Federation (The Universe Sentinel) [1983] 1 A.C. 366, [1982] 4 WLUK 6](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE05FCB10E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. However, the breach of contract gave rise to a damages claim whether or not the conduct was actionable in tort. Further, blackmail was covered by the tort of intimidation, _[Godwin v Uzoigwe Times, June 18, 1992, [1992] 6 WLUK 233](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I62A30A30E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=3602ef6afb7f4e71ae4dca74c652e568&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. The agreements might well have been made on the same terms without the threats, but the same causation test applied for intimidation as for duress where there was a threat of violence. Accordingly, the defendant had suffered loss and had a damages claim. His only loss was that he had had to execute the promissory note (paras [217-238](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Disposal -** No sum was due to the claimant under the framework agreement. He was entitled to damages regarding the promissory note. However, any payment by the defendant gave rise to an equal liability of the claimant. Neither party was entitled to recover from the other (paras [239-240](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

---

A joint venture between friends was held to be subject to an implied duty of good faith which one of them had breached. The duty, said the High Court, required the parties to work with greater mutual trust than would be the case for an ordinary contractual bargain. The parties were entitled to expect greater candour and cooperation than would be the case when contracting at arm's length.

The parties had entered into a joint venture to develop and run luxury hotels in Greece. One of the parties, a member of the Royal Family of Abu Dhabi, provided the majority of the investment. The other party, a Greek businessman, provided the rest of the financing and ran the business. The two men became great friends. However, the business ran into financial difficulties and the parties entered into a demerger agreement and a promissory note.

This action saw the investor claim for money allegedly owed under these two documents. By way of counterclaim, the businessman argued (amongst other things) that the investor's behaviour had breached a fiduciary duty which was owed to him and/or had breached an implied contractual duty of good faith.

The court held that the joint venture contract was a classic “relational” contract giving rise to a duty of good faith and that it satisfied the “business necessity” test needed in order to imply this term into a contract. It is important to appreciate that not all joint ventures would be deemed “relational” contracts. In this case the parties were friends entering into a long term collaboration in which their interests were interlinked. Their collaboration involved greater mutual trust than in an ordinary contractual bargain and they could expect greater candour and co-operation than would be the case when contracting at arm's length. The investor had breached his duty of good faith when he tried to sell his part of the business to a third party covertly. Using his position as a shareholder to obtain a financial benefit at the expense of the businessman also breached this duty.

The businessman had less success arguing that the investor owed him a fiduciary duty. It is exceptional for such duties to arise outside of well-established fiduciary relationships. Typically where the relationship is fiduciary, one party undertakes to, and is entrusted with authority to, manage the property or affairs of another and make decisions on behalf of that other (e.g. an agent). Conversely, the Greek joint venture relationship was a commercial one, albeit one that was subject to good faith.

---

1. In considering this submission, I bear in mind that it is exceptional for fiduciary duties to arise other than in certain settled categories of relationship.  The paradigm case of a fiduciary relationship is of course that between a trustee and the beneficiary of a trust.  Other settled categories of fiduciary include partners, company directors, solicitors and agents.  Those categories do not include shareholders, either in relation to the company in which they own shares or to each other. While it is clear that fiduciary duties may exist outside such established categories, the task of determining when they do is not straightforward, as there is no generally accepted definition of a fiduciary.  Indeed, it has been said that a fiduciary “is not subject to fiduciary obligations because he is a fiduciary; it is because he is subject to them that he is a fiduciary”: see Finn, _Fiduciary Obligations_ (1977), p2, cited with approval by Millett LJ in _Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew_ [[1998] Ch 1](https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/1996/533.html "Link to BAILII version"), 18.  If this is right, it simply begs the question of how to determine when a person is subject to fiduciary obligations if not by analysing the nature of their relationship with the person to whom the obligations are owed.
2. Despite saying in the _Mothew_ case that a fiduciary is defined by the obligations to which he is subject and not the other way round, Millett LJ did give a general description of a fiduciary as “someone who has undertaken to act for or on behalf of another in a particular matter in circumstances which give rise to a relationship of trust and confidence”: see [[1998] Ch 1](https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/1996/533.html "Link to BAILII version"), 18.  This description has often since been cited with approval, including by the Supreme Court in _FHR European Ventures LLP v Cedar Capital Partners LLC_ [[2014] UKSC 45](https://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2014/45.html "Link to BAILII version"), [[2015] AC 250](https://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/redirect.cgi?path=/uk/cases/UKSC/2014/45.html "Link to BAILII version"), para 5.  To similar effect, in another much quoted statement, Mason J in the High Court of Australia in _Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corp_ (1984) 156 CLR 41, 96-97, said:

> “The critical feature of these relationships is that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for or on behalf of or in the interests of another person in the exercise of a power or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person in a legal or practical sense. The relationship between the parties is therefore one which gives the fiduciary a special opportunity to exercise the power or discretion to the detriment of that other person who is accordingly vulnerable to abuse by the fiduciary of his position.”

1. Thus, fiduciary duties typically arise where one person undertakes and is entrusted with authority to manage the property or affairs of another and to make discretionary decisions on behalf of that person.  (Such duties may also arise where the responsibility undertaken does not directly involve making decisions but involves the giving of advice in a context, for example that of solicitor and client, where the adviser has a substantial degree of power over the other party’s decision-making: see Lionel Smith, “Fiduciary relationships: ensuring the loyal exercise of judgement on behalf of another” (2014) 130 LQR 608.)  The essential idea is that a person in such a position is not permitted to use their position for their own private advantage but is required to act unselfishly in what they perceive to be the best interests of their principal.  This is the core of the obligation of loyalty which Millett LJ in the _Mothew_ case [[1998] Ch 1](https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/1996/533.html "Link to BAILII version") at 18, described as the “distinguishing obligation of a fiduciary”.  Loyalty in this context means being guided solely by the interests of the principal and not by any consideration of the fiduciary’s own interests.  To promote such decision-making, fiduciaries are required to act openly and honestly and must not (without the informed consent of their principal) place themselves in a position where their own interests or their duty to another party may conflict with their duty to pursue the interests of their principal.  They are also liable to account for any profit obtained for themselves as a result of their position.
