---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:51 am
---

# Ali v Dinc [2020] EWHC 3055 (Ch)

## Summary

The High Court examined the principles applying to Quistclose trusts and the principles applying to priorities of property interests. In particular, it indicated that the [Land Registration Act 2002 s.26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I70F3AD80E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not prevent a party from asserting a potentially overriding interest as against a registered disponee because s.26 was directed at protecting the disponee's title, not its priority.

## Abstract

The claimant sought declarations and injunctions in relation to equitable proprietary interests in two properties. Alternatively, he claimed personal remedies by way of restitution or equitable compensation.

The claimant was the registered owner of two freehold properties (No.19 and No.67), but had transferred them to the first defendant (D1) for no consideration. D1 became the registered freehold owner. The claimant's solicitor was the third defendant (D3). To enable the transfers to be registered D1 provided funds to redeem an existing charge over No.19 which secured a debt of £67,500 (the Santander Charge). D1 made a gift to the second defendant (D2) of a 999-year lease of the first floor of No.67. D1 also granted a charge over No.19 to D3 as security for a loan of £460,000. Both the lease and the charge were registered. The loan was used exclusively for D1's and/or D2's purposes and benefit. No.19 was the claimant's home and he continued in occupation, rent-free, notwithstanding the transfer to D1. The claimant maintained that the transfer of the properties to D1 was subject to an oral agreement for sale at a price of £1.35 million, on the understanding that D1 would discharge the Santander Charge. D1 and D2, however, maintained that they had agreed that the claimant would gift the properties to D1, and D1 would use them to raise finance to give back to the claimant. D1 had discharged the Santander Charge, but the claimant had not received any payment. The claimant sought to recover the properties, or the £1.35 million. D3 claimed that even if the claimant had an equitable proprietary interest in No.19, it was postponed to D3's subsequent registered charge.

## Held

Judgment for claimant in part.

**Findings of fact** - An agreement existed between the claimant and D1, involving transfer of the properties to D1 and the payment of money to the claimant. That arrangement was not in writing. Neither the claimant nor D1 had presented sufficient evidence to establish the truth of their version of the arrangement. However, both had in mind as part of the arrangement that the properties would be transferred to D1 exclusively for raising funds to be transferred to the claimant (see paras [191-200](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Claims against D1:**

**(a) Intended oral contract** - Without clear agreed terms the intended contract was void for uncertainty. Even if the terms had been clear, it would have been of no effect because it did not comply with the [Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 s.2](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA99A6900E44B11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default)). The claimant was not entitled to payment of £1.35 million. However, when a void contract had been partly performed, the intended transaction had to be unwound. Both parties were under personal obligations to make counter-restitution. The claimant also had a proprietary restitutionary claim: since D1 still retained some interest in the properties he could be put on notice that the assets were not to be treated as his own and that he held them on constructive trust for the claimant, _[Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale v Islington LBC [1996] A.C. 669, [1996] 5 WLUK 343](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF83E7B00E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The claimant had an equitable interest in the properties and was entitled to an order requiring D1 to re-transfer the properties. Equally, the claimant had to make counter-restitution of the benefit of D1's repayment of the outstanding debt of £67,500. The means of doing that was to subrogate D1 to Santander's security interest (paras [208-213, 217, 219, 222-224, 227, 373, 377](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(b) Non-contractual oral arrangement** - A "Quistclose trust" existed where the claimant transferred property to a new owner on the basis that the asset was only to be used for a specific purpose. The duty which bound the borrower was not contractual, but fiduciary. There was no need for the claimant to intend to create a trust. The intended limitations on the borrower's power to use the funds had to be certain, but would be deemed sufficiently certain so long as the court could say that a given application of the money did or did not fall within its terms. It was not enough that the parties simply contemplated that the transferred assets would be used for a specific purpose: a mutual understanding was required. It was important that the transferor of the property intended the type of arrangement which would give rise to a Quistclose trust, but there was no need for the claimant to understand that it had any proprietary consequences. However, it was crucial that the recipient understood that their use of the property was specifically restricted. Those requirements were all met in this case and a Quistclose trust existed, _[Twinsectra Ltd v Yardley [2002] UKHL 12, [2002] 2 A.C. 164, [2002] 3 WLUK 573](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF41FF00E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Barclays Bank Ltd v Quistclose Investments Ltd [1970] A.C. 567, [1968] 10 WLUK 100](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6F3B36A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. D1's failure to transfer the loan funds to the claimant was a breach of trust and he was personally liable for a sum amounting to the net loan funds. Alternatively, the claimant was entitled to trace the loan funds (paras [229-230, 232, 234, 236-239, 241-245, 248, 253, 262, 375-376](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(c) Unintended gift** - Because there was a Quistclose trust, it was unnecessary to consider a presumed resulting trust. However, D1 would hold the properties on presumed resulting trust for the claimant, and that presumption was not barred by the [Law of Property Act 1925 Pt II s.60(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38DFCBE1E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default)), _[National Crime Agency v Dong [2017] EWHC 3116 (Ch), [2018] Lloyd's Rep. F.C. 28, [2017] 12 WLUK 157](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7B7F8E0DB5911E7B9E38E125CA5DFD6/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered (paras [267, 273-278](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(d) Failure of basis** - There was also force in the claimant's unjust enrichment claim based on the argument that there was an intended contract that never materialised (paras [283-284](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Claims against D2 and D3** - It was necessary to determine whether the claimant's equitable proprietary interest in the properties took priority over the subsequent registered proprietary interests of D2's lease and D3's charge:

**(a) Impact of Land Registration Act 2002 s.26** - Despite obiter comments in _[Mortgage Express v Lambert [2016] EWCA Civ 555, [2017] Ch. 93, [2016] 6 WLUK 453](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9F4A0010349411E69DCCFBF3B27DFCEA/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default))_, the [Land Registration Act 2002 s.26](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I70F3AD80E45211DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default)) did not prevent a party from asserting a potentially overriding interest as against a registered disponee. Section 26 was directed at protecting the disponee's title, not its priority, Mortgage Express considered (paras [307-309, 313](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(b) Priority if there was a Quistclose or constructive trust** - Because the claimant's proprietary interest in the properties was held under a Quistclose trust or a resulting trust under the Westdeutsche analysis, D3's charge was not subject to any overriding interest held by the claimant, but D2's lease was subject to the claimant's overriding interest. The claimant was entitled to an order requiring D1 to surrender the lease. No.19 remained encumbered by D3's registered security interest (paras [321-324, 373-374](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**(c) Priority if there was a presumed resulting trust** - If, contrary to the court's findings, there was no Quistclose or constructive trust, but the claimant had an interest under a presumed resulting trust, the same priorities consequences would follow. The line of authorities culminating in _[Credit and Mercantile Plc v Kaymuu Ltd [2015] EWCA Civ 655, [2016] B.P.I.R. 209, [2015] 7 WLUK 149](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I260F9D8023F711E5B311917A1E93A9CA/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=4d2f17422c9c488597f9ffe4c82528df&contextData=(sc.Default))_ fell into two categories. One was directed at identifying the true nature and quality of a claimant's proprietary interest. The other was directed at agency relationships. In this case, there was no evidence that prescribed D1's activities as an agent for the claimant. The claimant's equitable interest in the properties was subject to D1's use of them as security to raise the funds to be provided to the claimant, and the claimant's equitable interest was never intended to survive D1's disposition in favour of D3, which was undertaken for the purpose of raising funds. The claimant's interest was overreached by the disposition in favour of D3. Conversely, the claimant's interest took priority over D2's, notwithstanding the registration of D2's interest, because D2's interest was not acquired for valuable consideration, so was not protected by the Act, Credit and Mercantile considered (paras [354-355, 357-361](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
