---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:51 am
---

# Barnes v Phillips [2015] EWCA Civ 1056

## Summary

A judge had not erred in imputing an intention as to the respective shares owned by the parties to a property as tenants in common, having inferred a common intention to vary their beneficial interests in the property.

## Abstract

The appellant appealed against a decision regarding the beneficial shares held in a property jointly owned with the respondent as tenants in common.

The parties had been in a relationship since 1983 and had two children. In 1996 they bought a property as joint tenants. The appellant was self-employed. He paid the mortgage and some of the bills. The respondent worked full-time, except when the children were very young when she worked part-time. During their relationship, the appellant bought three investment properties registered in his name. In early 2005, he had debt problems and they remortgaged the jointly held property. Repayment of the existing mortgage and the appellant's debts effectively used all the remortgage funds. The parties separated in 2005. The respondent sought a declaration under the [Trusts of Land and Appointment of Trustees Act 1996 s.14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I226821D0E44F11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7096ac60ae8946ffb9ecdf460c34358e&contextData=(sc.Default)). The judge found that, on the purchase of the property, the parties' intention was that they were joint tenants in law and in equity, and that both were contributing equally. However, he found that the appellant had received almost 25 per cent of the net equity in the property following the remortgage, and imputed an intention at that stage that the property was to be held in shares of 75 per cent and 25 per cent, in the respondent's favour. He then considered that a further adjustment was required for the period from 2008, when the respondent had sole responsibility for the mortgage. She also had financial responsibility for the children, though the appellant made some contribution to child support. The judge held that the parties' shares were 85 per cent and 15 per cent, in favour of the respondent.

The appellant submitted that it had not been open to the judge to impute a common intention that the shares be unequal, having found that there was no agreement by the parties to change their beneficial interests.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) The judge's use of "impute" was intentional and appropriate. He was seeking to determine the shares in which the parties were to own the property following a change in the basis on which their beneficial interests were held. The imputation of intention was entirely permissible in that context where it was not possible to infer the parties' intention. Imputation was not permissible at the stage of determining whether there had been a common change of intention, only at the second stage of determining the respective shares where inference was not possible, _[Jones v Kernott [2011] UKSC 53, [2012] 1 A.C. 776, [2011] 11 WLUK 241](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89AC8D700ADE11E1ACE2AD2704BF921B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7096ac60ae8946ffb9ecdf460c34358e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. It was strongly arguable that the judge had concluded that there had been a common intention to vary the shares, despite that stage of reasoning being absent from his judgment. In those circumstances, it was open to the instant court to consider whether a common intention to vary should be inferred. The weight of the evidence supported an inference that the parties had intended to alter their shares in the property. The remortgage in 2005 was entered into for the appellant's sole benefit, to pay off debts incurred in his personal capacity. Virtually all of the money remaining after repayment of the original mortgage went to him. A month later, the relationship ended and the appellant left the property. In those circumstances, where nearly 25 per cent of the equity in the property had been paid to the appellant for his own purposes, and the relationship ended almost immediately afterwards, there was to be inferred a common intention at that point to vary their respective interests in the property. Both parties had contributed to the mortgage repayments between June 2005 and January 2008. After January 2008, the respondent alone made the repayments. That also supported an inference that there was a common intention to vary their interests in the property. The appellant could only legitimately have taken that stance and acted in that way if there had been such a change. A common intention should therefore be inferred to the parties at separation to vary their beneficial interests in the property (see paras [20-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) Having inferred a common intention to vary the respective interests, the judge entirely appropriately imputed an intention to the parties regarding their respective shares. The appellant's receipt of almost 25 per cent of the equity very shortly before the parties separated warranted an adjustment to the beneficial shares in the property. The judge had also correctly concluded that subsequent events required a further adjustment in the intention to be imputed to the parties. He properly took account of their respective positions, and in particular the mortgage repayments and repairs. The appellant had failed to contribute towards the mortgage repayments for the six years up to trial (paras [36-37](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) It should be open to a court to take account of financial contributions, or the lack of them, to child maintenance as part of the financial history of the parties, save in circumstances where it was clear to do so would result in double liability, _[Stack v Dowden [2007] UKHL 17, [2007] 2 A.C. 432, [2007] 4 WLUK 407](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I20AB2C10F4AD11DB93178FA5B02D29F5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=7096ac60ae8946ffb9ecdf460c34358e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and Jones followed. There was no danger of double liability in the instant case (paras [38-41](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
