---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:51 am
---

# Burns v Burns [1984] 1 All ER 244

The plaintiff lived with the defendant, who was a married man. The defendant bought a house under his name and using his own money. The plaintiff performed the domestic duties in the house as well as looking after the children. The plaintiff used her earnings to buy fixtures. Later, she left the defendant and claimed that she was entitled to a beneficial interest in the house. The judge ruled that the plaintiff was not entitled to any beneficial interest in the house. The plaintiff appealed. The Court of Appeal, Civil Division, dismissing the appeal, held that the powers conferred by the [Matrimonial Causes Act 1973](https://www.lexisnexis.com/uk/legal/search/enhRunRemoteLink.do?linkInfo=F%23GB%23UK_LEG%23num%251973_18a_Title%25&A=0.1408506313942398&backKey=20_T485869770&service=citation&ersKey=23_T485869352&langcountry=GB) in relation to the division of the property did not apply when an unmarried couple separated. Further, the court would not impute a common intention that the plaintiff was to have a beneficial interest from the fact that she performed the domestic duties of the household and brought up their children, or that she bought chattels for the household out of her earnings.

---

Where a man and woman cohabit in a house in the sole name of the man the court will not impute a common intention that the woman is to have a beneficial interest in the house simply from her performance of the usual domestic duties: only if she makes some direct contribution to the financial expenses of the household will such an intention be imputed to the parties. P went to live with D, a married man, knowing that he would never marry her. In the course of the next 17 years she bore him 2 children and they lived together in all respects as man and wife. P had to stay at home to look after the children and she performed all the usual domestic duties of a wife. When the children were old enough P returned to work and used her earnings towards consumer durables and towards fixtures, etc., for the house. She left D and claimed a beneficial interest in the house.

Held, that the judge had correctly held that P had no interest in the house and the appeal would be dismissed. Where a house was purchased in the man's sole name, with the woman making no contribution to the purchase price, and the parties making no express agreement as to the ownership of the beneficial interest in the house, there was a presumption that the man was the sole legal and beneficial owner. This presumption could be rebutted if a common intention that the woman should have a beneficial share in the house could be imputed to the parties, which required some sort of financial contribution to the acquisition of the property, which could be categorised as substantial. Fulfilment of domestic duties and looking after the family over the years could not amount to such a contribution, nor could the purchase of chattels for the house (_[Pettitt v Pettitt [1970] A.C. 777, [1969] 4 WLUK 46](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1E6A7910E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ee57c4439d46f79a644a60574c37fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 886, [1970] 7 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF292E20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ee57c4439d46f79a644a60574c37fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[Falconer v Falconer [1970] 1 W.L.R. 1333, [1970] 7 WLUK 120](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IA5650710E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ee57c4439d46f79a644a60574c37fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied, _[Hazell v Hazell [1972] 1 W.L.R. 301, [1971] 12 WLUK 100](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBBDF1DF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ee57c4439d46f79a644a60574c37fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Richards v Dove [1974] 1 All E.R. 888, [1974] 1 WLUK 45](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9789AC40E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64ee57c4439d46f79a644a60574c37fd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied).
