---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Cobbe v Yeoman’s Row Management Ltd [2008] UKHL 55

## Summary

In the circumstances, where a property developer had reached an oral agreement in principle with a property owner to buy its property and expended substantial amount of time and money in obtaining planning permission pursuant to the agreement but the owner subsequently refused to proceed on the agreed terms and enter into a binding contract, the remedy to which the developer was entitled to could not be based on proprietary estoppel or constructive trust. The developer was entitled to quantum meruit payment for his services in obtaining the planning permission.

## Abstract

The appellant company (Y) appealed against a decision ( _[[2006] EWCA Civ 1139, [2006] 1 W.L.R. 2964](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1272A9802DB011DB83A09284CD8C10D8/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ ) that the respondent property developer (C) had established proprietary estoppel against it and thus was entitled to a lien over a property to secure his interest.

Y had been formed to purchase a property consisting of a block of flats with potential for residential development. One of the flats was occupied by Y's director. Y and C reached an oral agreement in principle for sale of the land to C. The substance of the agreement was that C, at his own expense, would apply for planning permission; Y would sell the property to C or to a nominated company for an agreed up-front price of £12m; C would then, at his own expense, develop the land in accordance with the planning permission and sell off the residential units; and C would pay to Y 50 per cent of the amount by which the gross proceeds of sale exceeded £24m. Pursuant to that agreement, C expended considerable sum of money and time to obtain the planning permission. Y then sought to re-negotiate the core financial terms and refused to proceed on the basis of the originally agreed financial terms. C instituted proceedings claiming that he was entitled to an interest in the property by virtue of a constructive trust or proprietary estoppel. The Court of Appeal regarded the finding that Y's behaviour in repudiating, and seeking an improvement on, the core financial terms was unconscionable as justifying the creation of a proprietary estoppel. The issue was what relief, in the circumstances, C should have been granted.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The remedy to which, on the facts, C was entitled could be described neither as based on an estoppel nor as proprietary in character. To treat a "proprietary estoppel" as requiring neither a proprietary claim by the claimant nor an estoppel against the defendant but simply unconscionable behaviour was a recipe for confusion, _[Taylor Fashions Ltd v Liverpool Victoria Trustees Co Ltd [1982] Q.B. 133, [1979] 2 WLUK 209](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICE3BA0D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[Laird v Birkenhead Railway 70 E.R. 519, [1859] 11 WLUK 98](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF2DC3630BB5311DCB80092A59D721F81/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Attorney General of Hong Kong v Humphreys Estate (Queen's Gardens) Ltd [1987] A.C. 114, [1986] 12 WLUK 120](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I69BB48F0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. The reason why, in a "subject to contract" case, a proprietary estoppel could not ordinarily arise was that the would-be purchaser's expectation of acquiring an interest in the property in question was subject to a contingency that was entirely under the control of the other party to the negotiations, _[British Steel Corp v Cleveland Bridge & Engineering Co Ltd [1984] 1 All E.R. 504, [1981] 12 WLUK 236](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4D174AF0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ , _[London & Regional Investments Ltd v TBI Plc [2002] EWCA Civ 355, [2002] 3 WLUK 649](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE2927F00E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Pridean Ltd v Forest Taverns Ltd (1998) 75 P. & C.R. 447, [1996] 11 WLUK 421](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I28DA9790E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ac1eb2a6146f4815b76ff0a7179d6e3a&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. An expectation was, therefore, speculative. A subject-to-contract reservation made in the course of negotiations for a contract relating to the acquisition of an interest in land could be withdrawn, whether expressly or by inference from conduct. But debate about subject-to-contract reservations had only a peripheral relevance in the instant case, for such a reservation was pointless in the context of oral negotiations relating to the acquisition of an interest in land. C had spent his money and time well aware that the agreement was not legally enforceable. C had not been encouraged in the belief that Y would abide by the agreement. C's belief or expectation was always speculative.

(2) The unconscionability of Y's behaviour in withdrawing from the inchoate agreement immediately after planning permission had been obtained was a wholly inadequate basis for imposing a constructive trust over the property in order to provide C with a remedy for his disappointed expectations. The property was never joint venture property and there was no justification for treating it as though it was. (3) Y was unjustly enriched because it had obtained the value of C's services without having to pay for them. C was entitled to a quantum meruit payment for his services in obtaining the planning permission. The amount of the quantum meruit would represent the extent of the unjust enrichment for which Y should be held accountable to C. Where an agreement was reached under which an individual provided money and services in return for a legal but unenforceable promise that the promissor, after the money had been paid and the services provided, refused to carry out, the individual would be entitled to a restitutionary remedy. The consideration in return for which the money had been paid and the services had been provided would have wholly failed. In such a case the money paid could be recovered together with a fee for the services. The remedy would be co-extensive with the quantum meruit. The quantum meruit should be assessed on the basis that Y was entitled to use the architects' plans in respect of which planning permission had been granted.
