---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Cowan v Scargill [1985] Ch 270

Cowan itself involved a pension trust for British coalmine workers. Although such investments were permitted by the terms of the trust, the trustees wanted to adopt a policy of refusing to invest in oil or overseas. This decision was said to be made on the basis of principle and in accordance with the policy of National Union of Mineworkers (representatives of whom made up half of the pension trust management committee).

The court disagreed with this policy. The obligation of the trustees was to produce the best financial return for the trust fund, in order to preserve the value of the pensions of the current and future members of the pension scheme.

> ‘I find it impossible to see how it will assist trustees to do the best they can for their beneficiaries by prohibiting a wide range of investments that are authorised by the terms of the trust. Whatever the position today, nobody can say that conditions tomorrow cannot possibly make it advantageous to invest in one of the prohibited investments. It is the duty of trustees, in the interests of their beneficiaries, to take advantage of the full range of investments authorised by the terms of the trust, instead of resolving to narrow that range.’  
> (Sir Robert Megarry V-C)

---

Trustees are under a duty to act in the best interests of the beneficiaries. The plaintiffs were the five trustees of the Mineworkers' Pension Scheme appointed by the National Coal Board. The defendants were the five trustees appointed by the National Union of Mineworkers. An investment plan, known as the Investment Strategy and Business Plan 1982, was submitted to the trustees for their approval. The plan set out the guidelines to be followed in the investment of the funds of the Mineworkers' Pension Scheme. The defendants refused to concur in the adoption of the plan unless it was amended so that there would be no increase in the percentage of overseas investment, that overseas investments already made would be withdrawn at an opportune time and that there would be no investment in energies in direct competition with coal. Notwithstanding lengthy discussions, the trustees were unable to reach agreement. The plaintiffs applied to the court to resolve the deadlock, alleging that the defendants were acting in breach of their fiduciary duties as trustees of the pension funds.

Held, that

(1) trustees must exercise their powers in the best interest of the beneficiaries, without regard to their own personal interests or views;

(2) where the trust is required to provide financial benefits maximising the beneficiaries' financial benefit is, subject to rare exceptions, normally the paramount concern of the trustees;

(3) trustees in exercising their powers of investment must act reasonably and with prudence;

(4) the same principles apply to pension fund trustees in their powers as apply to trustees of any other trust;

(5) the restrictions sought by the defendants were sought in order to carry out union policy rather than for the benefit of the beneficiaries. The restrictions would not result in any material or appreciable benefit to the beneficiaries. Declaration that the defendants were in breach of their fiduciary duties as trustees of the pension scheme in refusing to concur in the adoption of the investment plan (_[Balls v Strutt 66 E.R. 984, [1841] 12 WLUK 63](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2870D060E57411DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Learoyd v Whiteley (1886) 33 Ch. D. 347, [1886] 7 WLUK 94](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF5E2F00E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _Blankenship v Boyle 329 F.Supp. 1089_, _[Wyvern Developments, Re [1974] 1 W.L.R. 1097, [1972] 11 WLUK 86](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0A605B50E42911DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Evans v London Cooperative Society Times, July 6, 1976, [1976] 1 WLUK 64](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC600F2F0E4B711DAB61499BEED25CD3B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, and Withers v Teachers' Retirement System of the City of New York 447 F.Supp. 1248 considered; _[Duke of Portland v Topham 11 E.R. 1242, [1864] 4 WLUK 4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2870F770E57411DAB242AFEA6182DD7E/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Learoyd v Whiteley (1887) 12 App. Cas. 727, [1887] 8 WLUK 4](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF5EA430E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Buttle v Saunders [1950] 2 All E.R. 193, [1950] 1 WLUK 363](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I4E14E4D0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Harrison Broadley v Smith [1964] 1 W.L.R. 456, [1964] 2 WLUK 12](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IBAEB2100E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Towler's Settlement Trusts, Re [1964] Ch. 158, [1963] 11 WLUK 3](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6F1B340E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[C (L) (An Infant), Re [1965] 2 Q.B. 449, [1964] 7 WLUK 92](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8039CCA1E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=64b9471bbc774360a8ababc5d43d9cfa&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _Billes, Re (1983) 148 D.L.R. (3d) 512_ referred to).
