---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Curtis v Pulbrook [2011] EWHC 167 (Ch)

## Summary

The purported gift of two tranches of shares in a company by the company's director to his daughter and wife were set aside in circumstances where neither legal nor beneficial title had been properly transferred and where, in any event, the substantial purpose of the transaction was to put those shares beyond the reach of individuals who might have brought a claim against him.

## Abstract

The claimant (T), by his personal representatives, sought a declaration that two deeds of gift in respect of shares in a company (F) executed by the first defendant director (P) be set aside and a final charging order be made in respect of them.

As T's financial adviser with authority over his finances, P had caused substantial sums of money to be paid from T's bank account in payment of personal legal fees. T commenced proceedings against P with the result that P was ordered to repay those sums. T also obtained an interim charging order over 445 shares in F that were registered as belonging to P as one of F's directors. Thereafter, a final charging order was made in respect of 131 of those shares, it being P's case that he had, by way of gift to his daughter and wife, divested himself of the remainder. The purported gifts took place after P had misappropriated the money from T's bank account. Both gifts were effected by the execution, amongst other things, of new share certificates and an entry on F's share register. However, neither his daughter nor wife received a stock transfer form and the only board meeting of F at the material time disclosed no mention of the relevant transfers. The issues for determination were whether (i) P had successfully transferred legal title to the shares to his daughter and wife; (ii) if not, there was a transfer of P's beneficial interest in those shares; (iii) in any event, T was entitled to an order setting aside the gifts pursuant to the [Insolvency Act 1986 s.423(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7FEE510E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default)).

## Held

Declaration granted in favour of claimant.

(1) A fundamental aspect of P's motivation for the purported gifts was an apprehension that he was going to be subjected to a major claim arising out of his misuse of T's bank account. P was not authorised by F to issue share certificates to his wife or daughter or to record them as shareholders in F's register. It followed that legal title had not been effectively transferred (see paras [35, 38-39](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") and [41-42](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) In effecting the gifts, P had tried, without success, to realise an immediate and outright transfer of his beneficial interest. No amount of benevolent construction of those transactions could lead a court to conclude that P was intending to declare himself a trustee in respect of that shareholding, _[Zeital v Kaye [2010] EWCA Civ 159, [2010] 2 B.C.L.C. 1, [2010] 3 WLUK 178](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I104EB43028D611DF8408C477981577AD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))__[Pennington v Waine [2002] EWCA Civ 227, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 2075, [2002] 3 WLUK 58](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DAECA30E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))__[Rose (Deceased), Re [1952] Ch. 499, [1952] 4 WLUK 23](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8F993C20E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[T Choithram International SA v Pagarani [2001] 1 W.L.R. 1, [2000] 11 WLUK 880](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC7746611E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Moreover, P had failed to take the necessary steps sufficient to enable his wife and daughter to obtain a transfer of the shareholding without further recourse to assistance from him. All they received were documents purporting to be new share certificates in their names which P had created without F's authority. The result was that, without P's assistance in making available the duly completed stock transfer forms, neither his wife nor his daughter could perfect the intended gifts. Accordingly, beneficial interest had not been effectively transferred. That being so there was nothing to prevent the interim charging order being made final in respect of P's remaining shareholding (paras [43-45](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") and [48](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) P had, in essence, attempted to put assets beyond T's reach, _[Inland Revenue Commissioners v Hashmi [2002] EWCA Civ 981, [2002] B.C.C. 943, [2002] 5 WLUK 72](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IC6D9F040E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Hill v Spread Trustee Co Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 542, [2007] 1 W.L.R. 2404, [2006] 5 WLUK 324](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I65BEC920E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. In those circumstances, [s.424](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID800E0E0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default)) permitted an application for an order under [s.423](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7FEE510E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default)) to be made by the "victim". T's representatives were plainly prejudiced by the transaction and could, for the purposes of seeking relief, be regarded as "victims", Hill and _[Random House UK Ltd v Allason [2008] EWHC 2854 (Ch), [2008] 12 WLUK 353](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IF97061B0CD8111DD9F14858F17792F5A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. Accordingly, had either of P's share transactions been effective, the court would have set them aside pursuant to [s.423(2)(a)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID7FEE510E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=ee56f917e5d847a1984d696d15e6bec4&contextData=(sc.Default)) (paras [50-52](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") and [54](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

---

Para 43 of judgment:

> Miss Angus very properly treated me to a full citation of the two most recent authorities bearing upon this question, namely Pennington v. Waine [[2002] 1 WLR 2075](https://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/redirect.cgi?path=/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2002/227.html "Link to BAILII version") and Zeital & anr v. David Norman Kaye & ors [[2010] EWCA Civ 159](https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2010/159.html "Link to BAILII version"). In Pennington v. Waine, Arden LJ (with whom Schiemann LJ agreed) identified three routes by which, in the context of a defective voluntarily transfer of shares, the court might avoid the rigorous application of the principle that equity will not compel the completion of an imperfect gift, in the absence of a valid declaration of trust. She described all three as methods whereby a court of equity might temper the wind to the shorn lamb. The first is where the donor has done everything necessary to enable the donee to enforce a beneficial claim without further assistance from the donor: see paragraphs 55 to 56 and Rose v. Inland Revenue Commissioners [[1952] Ch 499](https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/1952/4.html "Link to BAILII version"). The second is where some detrimental reliance by the donee upon an apparent although ineffective gift may so bind the conscience of the donor to justify the imposition of a constructive trust: see paragraph 59. The third is where by a benevolent construction an effective gift or implied declaration of trust may be teased out of the words used: see paragraphs 60 to 61, apparently based upon Choithram International SA v. Pagarani [[2001] 1 WLR 1](https://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/redirect.cgi?path=/uk/cases/UKPC/2000/46.html "Link to BAILII version"). On its facts, Pennington v Waine appears to have been an example of a sufficient detrimental reliance by the donee, who had agreed to become a director of the subject company upon an assumption that he had received an effective gift of qualifying shares in it: see paragraphs 64 and 66.
