---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Graham-York v York [2015] EWCA Civ 72

## Summary

A judge had not erred in quantifying at 25 per cent a woman's beneficial interest in the property in which she had lived with her partner. Nor had she erred in directing that payment was to be made from what remained of the net proceeds of sale once the indebtedness secured by a mortgage had been discharged in full.

## Abstract

The appellant (G) appealed against an order concerning the quantification of her beneficial interest in a property and the extent to which her interest was diminished by satisfaction of the second respondent building society's claim as mortgagee.

G had lived with the deceased (D) for 34 years, from 1975 until his death in 2009. They never married, but had two children. From 1983 they lived together at the property, which was registered in D's sole name and mortgaged to the building society. There was no express agreement as to beneficial interests. G continued to live in the property after D's death, accruing substantial mortgage arrears. In 2011 the building society issued proceedings against the first respondent personal representative, seeking possession of the property. Although the personal representative did not contest the claim, G joined the proceedings, claiming that she had a beneficial interest arising from a constructive trust and taking priority over the mortgage. In September 2013, the court made an order for possession in favour of the building society and ordered that the property be sold. G did not appeal. In December 2013, a judge determined that G and D had a common intention to share in the beneficial ownership of the property. She found that while G had made a small financial contribution, the purchase of the property and the subsequent household expenditure had largely been financed by D's business ventures. She assessed G's interest, on the basis of her financial and non-financial contributions, to be 25 per cent. She directed that, upon the sale of the property, the building society was to recoup all the indebtedness secured by the mortgage and that G was to be paid her share out of any monies remaining. That effectively reduced G's share to below 25 per cent.

G submitted that the judge (1) should have found that her interest was worth 50 per cent; (2) had erred in directing that her share should be paid after, rather than before, payment of the sums owed to the building society.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) In determining that G had a 25 per cent interest, the judge had directed herself properly and had made no legal or analytical error; her decision did not fall outside the ambit of reasonable decision-making. D and G had not owned their home jointly and had not had a relationship in which love and affection were at the forefront. Indeed, D had been abusive, controlling and threatening, and mercenary considerations appeared to have been to the fore. In those circumstances it was not easy to infer that the couple had intended that their interests in the property should be equal, _[Stack v Dowden [2007] UKHL 17, [2007] 2 A.C. 432, [2007] 4 WLUK 407](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I20AB2C10F4AD11DB93178FA5B02D29F5/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fb34651f27024a0da6947791210f18bd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. While D and G had clearly intended to share the beneficial interest, it was impossible to divine a common intention as to the proportions in which it was to be shared. It was essential to bear in mind that, in deciding what shares were fair, the court was not concerned with redistributive justice. The fact that G had endured years of abuse did not mean that the court could allocate her an interest that right-minded people might think amounted to appropriate compensation. The question was what amounted to a fair share, having regard to the whole course of dealing between the couple in relation to the property. The judge had clearly focused on the relevant consideration, namely the extent of G's financial and non-financial contributions, _[Jones v Kernott [2011] UKSC 53, [2012] 1 A.C. 776, [2011] 11 WLUK 241](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I89AC8D700ADE11E1ACE2AD2704BF921B/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fb34651f27024a0da6947791210f18bd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Where the property had been purchased in the name of one party only, there was no presumed starting point of equality of interests, and no presumption that equality was the only fair solution, _[Oxley v Hiscock [2004] EWCA Civ 546, [2005] Fam. 211, [2004] 5 WLUK 99](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I15C110D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fb34651f27024a0da6947791210f18bd&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. Finally, non-financial contributions would normally be proportionately greater the longer the cohabitation. However, that had to be set against the judge's finding that G's financial contribution had been small (see paras [16-28](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) As to whether G should receive her share before or after the discharge of the mortgage debt, the only pleaded issue was the building society's request for a determination of whether G's interest took priority over the mortgage. G had not pleaded an equity of exoneration. Had she done so, the question would have been whether she could demonstrate that all or some of the debt secured by the mortgage represented lending incurred solely for D's benefit, and not for the benefit of the household. If she could have shown that, she could possibly have claimed to be exonerated by D in equity. She had, however, failed to discharge the burden upon her. In any event, such evidence as there was pointed away from the conclusion that the borrowing had been for D's sole benefit. D had been responsible for generating almost all of the household income. G had shared the benefit of his business ventures, and it would be unconscionable that she should do so without sharing the burden of the mortgage (see paras [29-35](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
