---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Group Seven Ltd v Nasir [2019] EWCA Civ 614

## Summary

A judge had been wrong to acquit an accountant of dishonest assistance in breaches of trust and fiduciary duty on the basis that it required a finding of personal dishonesty. In the test for dishonesty in accessory liability, there was no longer room for the discredited subjective second limb of the _[Ghosh](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I472988A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ test.

## Abstract

In conjoined appeals, a defrauded company, a bank and one of its employees appealed against findings of liability for dishonest assistance in a breach of trust and of vicarious liability against a number of professionals and organisations.

A Swiss registered company was defrauded of €100 million. The fraud was followed by an attempt to launder the proceeds using the client account of a London firm of solicitors. The law firm was a multi-disciplinary partnership, whose members included an accountant (Landman) and two solicitors. The money laundering was only partly successful and as a result of police intervention €88 million was returned. The instant proceedings concerned attempts to recover the balance from the law firm, from a Swiss bank employee (Louanjli), who had dishonestly provided the law firm with a bank reference for the fraudster and his company, and by vicarious liability from the Swiss bank ("the Bank") that employed Louanjli. The judge found that all but one of the necessary ingredients of accessory liability for dishonest assistance were present in relation to Landman. In issue was the whether the judge had been correct to require a finding of personal dishonesty when numerous payments were made out of the client account. That meant that Landman escaped liability as an accessory for dishonestly assisting breaches of trust by the fraudster and his company and for breaches of fiduciary duty.

The defrauded company argued that the judge's test for dishonest assistance was faulty and Landman and his law firm were liable; Louanjli and the Bank argued that the judge should have found that Landman's actions were the effective cause of the loss and amounted to a break in the chain of causation; The Bank challenged the judge's attribution to it of vicarious liability for Louanjli's wrongdoing in dishonestly assisting the breach of trust and in conspiring to injure the Swiss company by unlawful means.

## Held

Appeal allowed in part.

**Dishonest assistance -** In the test for dishonesty in accessory liability, there was no longer room for the discredited subjective second limb of the Ghosh test. The defendant's actual state of knowledge and belief as to relevant facts still formed a crucial part of the first stage of the test of dishonesty, but the standard of appraisal applied to those facts was a purely objective one of whether the defendant's conduct was honest or dishonest according to the standards of ordinary decent people. The judge had erred by applying to Landman the same compartmentalised approach as he had adopted in relation to the two solicitors. Whereas they and the Law Society had been deceived by Landman about a corrupt payment of £170,000 to him, his negotiation of that payment, and his concealment of it from his colleagues and the Law Society, were self-evidently dishonest. The judge had been wrong to acquit Landman and the appeals on that issue were allowed, _[R. v Ghosh (Deb Baran) [1982] Q.B. 1053, [1982] 4 WLUK 44](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I472988A0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ not followed, _[Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v Tan [1995] 2 A.C. 378, [1995] 5 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9062CDB1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Ivey v Genting Casinos UK Ltd (t/a Crockfords Club) [2017] UKSC 67, [2018] A.C. 391, [2017] 10 WLUK 580](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I0D169600B96C11E7A68BFC577B65FE9C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed, _[Barlow Clowes International Ltd (In Liquidation) v Eurotrust International Ltd [2005] UKPC 37, [2006] 1 W.L.R. 1476, [2005] 10 WLUK 204](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6F7A1460E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied (see paras [32, 57, 95-104](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

**Actual knowledge and blind-eye knowledge -** It was convenient to use the expression "blind-eye knowledge" to denote knowledge that was imputed to someone who deliberately abstained from enquiry in order to avoid certain knowledge of what they already suspected to be the case. In the context of dishonest assistance for breach of trust or fiduciary duty, it was correct in principle, to equate blind-eye knowledge with actual knowledge for the purposes of the first stage of the test laid down in Tan and endorsed in Barlow Clowes and Ivey. Even though knowledge was confined to actual and blind-eye knowledge, there was no reason in principle why a person's beliefs could not include suspicions which fell short of constituting blind-eye knowledge. The existence of such suspicions, and the weight to be attributed to them, were matters to be taken into account at the objective second stage of the test, _[Manifest Shipping Co Ltd v Uni-Polaris Insurance Co Ltd (The Star Sea) [2001] UKHL 1, [2003] 1 A.C. 469, [2001] 1 WLUK 389](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEDBFFA10E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [58-60](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**The chain of causation -** The test had two stages: first, a requirement to show that the conduct had assisted the breach of trust and was more than minimal, and secondly that the loss directly resulted from the breach of trust, _[Baden v Societe Generale pour Favoriser le Developpement du Commerce et de l'Industrie en France SA [1993] 1 W.L.R. 509, [1983] 4 WLUK 133](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I6D7A4CC0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered and _[Grupo Torras SA v Al-Sabah (No.5) [2001] Lloyd's Rep. Bank. 36, [2000] 11 WLUK 76](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB56F2AF0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[AIB Group (UK) Plc v Mark Redler & Co Solicitors [2014] UKSC 58, [2015] A.C. 1503, [2014] 11 WLUK 99](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7F11AA3064E511E491BDE282FBEDD2C3/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. The bank reference that Louanjli had provided had convinced the solicitors that the fraudster was genuine and that they could legitimately accept the money into their client account. The payments out by Landman did not break the chain of causation as without them Louanjli could not himself have been paid. The judge had correctly determined that Louanjli had accessory liability. The conclusion above in relation to Landman's liability for dishonest assistance had no effect on the issue of causation, which was premised on the judge's primary findings of fact and those had not been disturbed in any way (paras [105-111](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

**Vicarious liability of the Bank-** In determining whether the Bank was vicariously liable for Louanjli's wrongdoing, an appeal court should not be tempted to substitute its own evaluative judgment. The only question was whether the judge had erred in law, given his unchallenged findings of fact. It was common ground that "the sufficient connection test" and the social policy behind it applied, _[Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2001] UKHL 22, [2002] 1 A.C. 215, [2001] 5 WLUK 105](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IE1A0CC01E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ _[Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366, [2002] 12 WLUK 137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9B82A9A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Mohamud v Wm Morrison Supermarkets Plc [2016] UKSC 11, [2016] A.C. 677, [2016] 3 WLUK 90](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AC5EB20E06C11E58FAB889BCE4AFF26/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed. There was no doubt that Louanjli was employed by the Bank. The issue was whether there was sufficient connection between that employment and his conduct to make it just that the Bank be legally responsible for the consequences of his conduct. The judge had been entitled to decide that the connection between Louanjli's wrongdoing and his role at the Bank were different from and the relationship much closer than in _[Kooragang Investments Pty v Richardson & Wrench [1982] A.C. 462, [1981] 7 WLUK 230](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID5407640E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=634ff2e56e4d42a3baa569b50113973f&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Kooragang distinguished (paras [135-139](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
