---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:50 am
---

# Group Seven Ltd v Nasir [2017] EWHC 2466 (Ch)

## Summary

The fact that a person had dishonestly made payments out of a solicitors' client account in breach of the Solicitors Regulation Authority Accounts Rules was not sufficient to give rise to accessory liability for dishonest assistance in breach of trust where that person had acted on the instructions of a person in the belief that the money belonged to that person.

## Abstract

The claimant companies sought damages from various defendants for deceit, conspiracy and accessory liability.

The claims arose from a fraud practised on a substantial Swiss group which had €100 million to invest. It formed a Maltese subsidiary, the first claimant (C1), and transferred that sum to it. The subsidiary transferred the money to a company controlled by the fraudsters pursuant to a loan agreement, which was subsequently set aside by the court. The fraudsters attempted to launder the money and it was transferred to the client account of a London firm of solicitors, the third defendant (D3). On the instructions of one of the fraudsters (N) and his company (L) payments of about €15.9 million were made out of the account. The bank which operated the client account reported the matter to the police and the remaining moneys in the account were frozen. Around €88 million was returned to the Swiss group and some of the €15.9 million was returned to D3, but about €12 million was not recovered. N had been convicted of criminal offences in connection with the fraud. L had been placed in liquidation. C1 had assigned its claim to a Panamanian company (C2). C2 obtained judgment against two of the fraudsters but had not recovered anything from them. The first and second defendants (D1 and D2) were sued as principal players in the fraud. C2 obtained judgment against D1 in default of defence. D2 had not taken part in the proceedings. The claim against D3, and two of its principals (D4 and D5), was for compensation for dishonest assistance in relation to breaches of trust by L in relation to the €100 million in the D3 client account. There were subsidiary claims against D3 and D4 for unconscionable receipt of trust moneys. The seventh defendant (D7) had been an employee of the sixth defendant Swiss bank (D6). It was alleged that D7 made dishonestly false statements about N to D3 and was accordingly liable in deceit, for conspiracy with N and for dishonestly assisting a breach of trust. D6 was said to be vicariously liable for the wrongdoing of its employee. There was a further claim against D7 and his company (D10) for unconscionable receipt of trust moneys. The claimants made similar claims against another banker (D8) and his company (D9), in deceit, conspiracy, dishonest assistance and unconscionable receipt. In a second action, L made similar claims against D3 to D10. D4's case was that he and his colleagues acting on behalf of D3 had been satisfied about the source of the €100 million and had not suspected anything untoward in relation to the payments from the D3 client account.

## Held

Judgment for claimants.

(1) The court was satisfied that D2 had conspired with D1 and others to defraud C1 of €100 million. He knew the details of the conspiracy and participated in its implementation. He was liable to pay damages in respect of the losses suffered by C1. The damages payable by D1 and D2 respectively were assessed in the same amount of €9.18 million (see paras [76-88](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) Rule 14.5 of the SRA Accounts Rules 2011 in force at the relevant time prohibited the provision of banking facilities through a client account. Payments into, and transfers or withdrawals from, a client account had to be in respect of instructions relating to an underlying transaction or to a service forming part of the firm's normal regulated activities. One of the purposes of that rule was to assist in the prevention of money laundering. The majority of payments made by D3 on N's instructions involved a breach of r.14.5. D4's knowledge of most of the alleged underlying transactions came from what N had told him. In some cases where D4 said that he knew of the underlying transaction or investment he did not have any relevant information, not even from N himself. D4 did not make a genuine effort to apply the advice he had been given as to when it was proper for D3 to approve the requests for payment. The explanation for his conduct was that he wanted to comply with N's request even though he knew that D3 was not complying with the Accounts Rules. He deliberately and knowingly broke the Rules influenced by the fact that N had agreed to pay him £170,000. He made knowingly false statements to D5 as to his knowledge of the underlying transactions. He was dishonest (paras [267-338](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) L and N had asked D3 to pay €1 million to D9 and that sum had been paid. The idea that D9 had provided management consultancy services to L had no reality. What L had been paying for was the assistance which D8 and D7 provided to L in relation to paying the €100 million into a bank account. D8 appreciated that that was the reason for the payment. He had collaborated with D7 who provided a great deal of the assistance given to L. D7 expected to be paid for what he had done, and D8 shared part of the €1 million with D7's company, D10 (para.[393](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) D5 did not actually know and did not have blind-eye knowledge that L was not the beneficial owner of the €100 million or that L was not entitled to use that money as if it were its own, _[Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v Tan [1995] 2 A.C. 378, [1995] 5 WLUK 382](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9062CDB1E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2861ed7ca53848c49d10b83f4a9fc428&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Manifest Shipping Co Ltd v Uni-Polaris Insurance Co Ltd (The Star Sea) [2001] UKHL 1, [2003] 1 A.C. 469, [2001] 1 WLUK 389](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IEDBFFA10E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2861ed7ca53848c49d10b83f4a9fc428&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. He had sought advice and tried to follow it. He carried out checks on the recipients of the payments; he might have done so incompetently but he had not done so dishonestly. In relation to knowledge of the underlying transactions he had relied on D4 and had been entitled to do so. He was not liable for dishonest assistance (paras [449-453](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(5) D4 was not liable for dishonestly assisting a breach of trust. He did not know that the money did not belong to L and did not have blind-eye knowledge, despite his propensity for dishonesty. Although there had been a dishonest breach of the Accounts Rules, he could not be an accessory to L's breach of trust when he thought that L was using its own money to make payments which it wished to make, _[Madoff Securities International Ltd (In Liquidation) v Raven [2013] EWHC 3147 (Comm), [2014] Lloyd's Rep. F.C. 95, [2013] 10 WLUK 612](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I2C7FB3103AA811E39B63D874E62B619A/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2861ed7ca53848c49d10b83f4a9fc428&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered, _[Ultraframe (UK) Ltd v Fielding [2005] EWHC 1638 (Ch), [2006] F.S.R. 17, [2005] 7 WLUK 862](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IDF8F82C0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2861ed7ca53848c49d10b83f4a9fc428&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied. D3, D4 and D5 were not liable for dishonestly assisting a breach of trust (paras [454-472](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(6) D4 was liable for unconscionable receipt in respect of the £170,000 (paras [484-487](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(7) It was not unconscionable for D3 to retain fees it had been paid by L of £219,150 (paras [488-493](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(8) D7 had assisted L's breach of trust. He knew all of the relevant facts. He acted dishonestly. He had blind-eye knowledge that L had come by the money in a way which meant that it was not entitled to treat the money as its own. He had good grounds for suspecting that he was assisting in money laundering. The ingredients of knowingly assisting a breach of trust had been established. D7 was liable to pay equitable compensation in the sum of €9.18 million. He was also liable in conspiracy, but not in deceit (paras [496-524](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(9) D7 was liable for unconscionable receipt in respect of payments totaling €561,860 made by D9 to D10 (paras [525-529](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(10) D6 was vicariously liable for D7's wrongdoing in dishonestly assisting L's breach of trust and in conspiracy, _[Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2002] UKHL 48, [2003] 2 A.C. 366, [2002] 12 WLUK 137](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9B82A9A0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2861ed7ca53848c49d10b83f4a9fc428&contextData=(sc.Default))_ and _[Mohamud v Wm Morrison Supermarkets Plc [2016] UKSC 11, [2016] A.C. 677, [2016] 3 WLUK 90](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9AC5EB20E06C11E58FAB889BCE4AFF26/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2861ed7ca53848c49d10b83f4a9fc428&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [531-555](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(11) D8 was liable for dishonest assistance and conspiracy but not for deceit. He was liable in the sum of €9.18 million. He was also liable for unconscionable receipt of €700,000 by D9 (paras [556-559](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(12) In the second action L was entitled to certain relief against D6, D7 and D8 (paras [560-569](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
