---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:49 am
---

# Hammond v Mitchell [1991] 1 WLR 1127

The financial entitlements of an unmarried couple have to be worked out according to their strict equitable rights, which necessitate an enquiry as to whether there had been any agreement or understanding reached between them based on express discussion and confirmed by action in reliance thereon, or, in the absence of such agreement, whether an intention to share beneficial ownership can be imputed to them. H and M began living together in 1977. While they were both working, H encouraged M to become a part-time businesswoman. The first of the couple's two children was born in 1979, after which the couple lived in a bungalow in Essex. The bungalow was bought by H with a building society mortgage and was conveyed into his sole name. Extensions to the bungalow and the purchase of surrounding land were paid for by replacing the mortgage with a bank loan, and M agreed that any interest she had in the bungalow as occupier was postponed to the claim of the bank. M supported H in his business adventures and he encouraged her part-time business. H entered into a number of business ventures, using the bungalow as security. H purchased a house in Spain and for a short time they lived there, although they also retained possession of the bungalow. The relationship broke down in 1988 with a final separation in February 1989. M then claimed a beneficial interest in the bungalow and the Spanish property.

Held, that (1) the financial entitlements of the parties had to be worked out according to their strict equitable rights, which necessitated an enquiry as to whether there had been any agreement or understanding reached between them based on express discussion and confirmed by action in reliance thereon, or, in the absence of such agreement, whether an intention to share beneficial ownership could be imputed to them; (2) there was an express understanding that M should have a beneficial interest in the bungalow and the extensions to it, on which she relied to her potential detriment in allowing her rights as occupier to be subordinated to those of the bank and through her support of H in his business ventures; and (3) taking account of all the circumstances, including M's contribution as an unpaid business assistant and mother, the proper proportion of her beneficial interest should be one-half; but that, in the absence of agreement, there was no justification for imputing any intention that M should have an interest in the Spanish property (_[Grant v Edwards [1986] Ch. 638, [1986] 3 WLUK 264](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IB371FB60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=1f3d6086bc2543c6ac8ca7bef8730501&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Lloyds Bank Plc v Rosset [1988] C.L.Y. 491 applied). Per curiam: observations were made on the conduct of proceedings brought by unmarried couples disputing their property rights and ownership of chattels.
