---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:49 am
---

# James v Thomas [2007] EWCA Civ 1212

Trust and trustee — Constructive trust. Whilst, in the instant case, where the claimant's case was based on constructive trust or proprietary estoppel, there was force in the criticisms made by the claimant of the terms in which the judge had expressed his understanding of the law, applying the correct principles the claim could not succeed. There was no doubt that the judge was entitled to hold that the assurances on which the claimant relied, whether on their own or taken with other evidence, were insufficient to found a claim based on constructive trust or proprietary estoppel.

---

## Summary

Assurances given by one person to another when they were living together in a property as man and wife were not intended or understood in the circumstances as a promise of some interest in the property and were insufficiently specific to found an estoppel or constructive trust.

## Abstract

The appellant (J) appealed against a decision dismissing her claim to a beneficial interest in a property of which the respondent (T) was the registered proprietor.

T had become the sole owner of the property a number of years before he met J. They had formed a relationship and J had moved into the property to live with T. They had lived together as man and wife for about 15 years. During that time J had helped T with his business and had then become a partner in it. Together they had carried out extensive works of renovation to the property. After the relationship ended J sought a declaration that T held the property on trust for the two of them in equal shares or in such shares as the court should determine. The judge held that there was insufficient evidence to support J's claim of a constructive trust based on a common understanding or common intention that she should have a share in the property. He further held that she had not acquired an interest in the property by way of proprietary estoppel based on assurances made to her by T.

J appealed arguing that the judge had failed to recognise and give effect to the propositions of law that  
(1) the common intention necessary to found a constructive trust or proprietary estoppel might be formed at any time after the acquisition of the property;  
(2) such common intention might be inferred from evidence of the parties' conduct during the whole course of their dealings in relation to the property;  
(3) a proprietary estoppel or constructive trust could arise where T had assured J or led her to believe that she would obtain a beneficial interest in the property without specifying the extent of that interest.

## Held

Appeal dismissed.

(1) Notwithstanding an observation by the judge which taken alone suggested otherwise, the better view when the judgment was read as a whole was that the judge did recognise that there was a need to consider, in relation to constructive trust as well as in relation to proprietary estoppel, whether the parties had formed a common intention in or after their relationship had begun that J should have a beneficial share in the property.

(2) Although the judge might have erred in failing to recognise that a common intention that J should be entitled to a share in the property might be inferred from evidence of the parties' conduct during the whole course of their dealings in relation to the property, any error in that respect would not be material in the circumstances of the case. The critical question was whether J could rely on the use of the money generated by the business to pay the mortgage as evidence of an agreement, understanding or intention that she should have a beneficial share of the property, and the answer to that question was in the negative. On the facts the only source of funds to pay the mortgage, as well as all other household and personal expenses, was the business. While the parties were living together they were dependent on the business to meet their outgoings. It was not surprising therefore that J should do what she could to ensure the business prospered. But that did not give rise to an inference that the parties had agreed or reached a common understanding that she should have a share in the property. What she did was wholly explicable on other grounds.

(3) The judge had not failed to recognise that an estoppel or constructive trust could arise where T had assured J that she would obtain a beneficial interest in the property without specifying the extent of that interest. The judge had been entitled to find that assurances by T to J that improvements to the property and matters relating to the business would be for the benefit of both of them and that she would be provided for on his death were insufficiently specific to found an estoppel or constructive trust. The assurances were not intended or understood as a promise of some property interest.
