---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:48 am
---

# Layton v Martin [1986] 2 FLR 227

P had met the deceased in 1967 and had become his mistress. She was 29 and unmarried. He was a married man aged 50 whose wife was in poor health. By a letter dated May 25, 1975 the deceased asked P to come and live with him offering "what emotional security I can give, plus financial security during my life and financial security after my death: He implied and P understood that the deceased would marry her after his wife died. She provided wifely services and was paid a salary of GBP 100 p.m. rising to GBP 120 p.m. plus GBP 30 p.w. housekeeping. In 1977 the deceased's wife died but he did not in the event marry P. He made some provision for her in his wills, the last being in 1979 by way of a legacy of GBP 15,000 with provisions relating to her continued residence with him until his death. Subsequently, the deceased cut P out of the will and gave her a written notice of dismissal in 1980. They parted though, without rancour and kept in touch until the deceased's death in April 1982. In 1983 P made a claim for financial provision based on the contents of the 1975 letter contending (i) that the deceased's representations amounted to a constructive trust; (ii) that under the doctrine of proprietary estoppel equity would subject the estate to such beneficial interest in her favour and would give effect to the representation upon which she relied and (iii) that there was a concluded contract between them.

Held, dismissing P's application, that P had made no relevant contribution to the acquisition or preservation of any asset of the deceased so as to enable her to claim a beneficial interest therein and that a common intention in itself was insufficient. The doctrine of proprietary estoppel was also inappropriate since no specific assets could be identified. As far as the contractual argument was concerned the "offer" in the 1975 letter was no more then a statement of intent and it was questionable whether there was any intention to create a legally binding contract. The fact that P had not lived with the deceased continuously until his death meant that she was not entitled to bring any claim under the 1975 Act. (_[Pettitt v Pettitt [1970] A.C. 777, [1969] 4 WLUK 46](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1E6A7910E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e3634d86bfa74c378433c52cbe9414d0&contextData=(sc.Default))_, _[Gissing v Gissing [1971] A.C. 886, [1970] 7 WLUK 29](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/IAF292E20E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e3634d86bfa74c378433c52cbe9414d0&contextData=(sc.Default))_, Crabb v Arun DC [1975] C.L.Y. 119 and _[Taylor Fashions Ltd v Liverpool Victoria Trustees Co Ltd [1982] Q.B. 133, [1979] 2 WLUK 209](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICE3BA0D0E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=e3634d86bfa74c378433c52cbe9414d0&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered).
