---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:35 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:46 am
---

# Re Pauling’s Settlement Trusts [1964] Ch 303

1. Where a bank undertakes to act as a paid trustee, and places itself in a position where its duty as trustee conflicts with its interest as a banker, the court will be very slow to grant relief under the [Trustee Act 1925 s.61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38B44F10E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=63a44eb9e0f64f77894146ac717fdecf&contextData=(sc.Default)).
2. The power under a clause in a settlement to raise part of the expectant or presumptive share of a child and to pay it to the child "for his or her own absolute use" can only be exercised for the benefit of the child to be advanced, and a trustee cannot properly leave the child entirely free to apply the sum for that purpose without any responsibility on his part to inquire as to its application.
3. If trust money is advanced for an express purpose, the child advanced is under a duty to carry out that purpose and cannot properly apply it to another purpose; and, if any misapplication comes to the trustee's notice, the trustee cannot safely make further advances for a particular purpose without making sure that the money is applied for that purpose.
4. A trustee who carries out a transaction in breach of trust with the beneficiary's apparent consent may still be liable if he knew or ought to have known that the beneficiary was acting under the undue influence of another, notwithstanding that the trustee received no benefit from the breach of trust.
5. The [Limitation Act 1939](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I957C761070DE11E48D17BA781379136C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=63a44eb9e0f64f77894146ac717fdecf&contextData=(sc.Default)) does not afford a defence where the plaintiff's interest is a future interest within the proviso to s.19(2) and does not fall into possession when an invalid advance is made; where there is express statutory provision for a period of limitation (even where the proviso to s.19(2) takes effect) there is no room for the equitable doctrine of laches. Under a marriage settlement made in 1919 the income of the trust fund was held on trust for the life of the wife and subject thereto was to be held in trust for her children or remoter issue. There were four children of the marriage, A, a son, born 1920, B, a son, born 1925, C, a daughter, born 1928, and D, a son, born 1930. By clause 11 of the settlement the respondent bank-trustees were empowered to raise any part "not exceeding in the whole one-half of the then expectant or presumptive or vested share of any child … and to pay the same to him or her for his or her absolute use or to pay or apply the same for his or her advancement or otherwise for his or her benefit in such manner as the trustees shall think fit." In 1948 the bank made advances (i) to the two eldest sons, it being understood that a house would be purchased in the Isle of Man, the property to be settled on the mother for life and on the two sons after her death. With the knowledge of the bank and without the consent of the sons the property was conveyed to the father and mother and was not settled. The house was ultimately sold at a loss, when mortgaged, and the whole advance was swallowed up. Advance (ii) respecting the eldest sons' shares was made in September 1948, with their assent, for the purchase of furniture. Advance (iii) was made to the two eldest sons and applied in paying off a loan to the mother, the sons being assigned two small insurance policies on the mother's life. In May 1949 the bank made advance (iv) to the two eldest sons which was paid to the mother's account, the sons consenting and appreciating that the money was for improvements to the house in the Isle of Man which had not yet been sold. Advance (v) was in respect of the daughter's share nominally for furnishing a Chelsea house, but was in fact spent on the Isle of Man property and in reducing the mother's overdraft. The daughter conceded that GBP 300 was in fact spent on furniture for the Chelsea house and was irrecoverable by her. In 1951 advance (vi) was made to the youngest son, his consent being obtained, and paid into the mother's account. Advance (vii) was made in 1954. In 1958 the children took action against the bank for breach of trust, and the bank pleaded consent of the beneficiaries, the [Limitation Act 1939](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I957C761070DE11E48D17BA781379136C/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=63a44eb9e0f64f77894146ac717fdecf&contextData=(sc.Default)) laches and acquiescence, and claimed relief under the [Trustee Act 1925 s.61](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I38B44F10E44811DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=63a44eb9e0f64f77894146ac717fdecf&contextData=(sc.Default)).

Held, giving judgment for the plaintiffs on cross-appeals, that the bank were not in breach of trust regarding advances (iv) and (vii); that the bank were entitled to partial relief under s.61 concerning advance (iii); and that the bank were in breach of trust and therefore liable regarding advances (i), (ii), (v) and (vi). The Limitation Act, 1939, did not afford a defence (affirming in part decision of Wilberforce J.).
