---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:36 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:45 am
---

# Target Holdings v Redferns [1996] AC 421

R, a firm of solicitors, acted in a commercial conveyancing transaction for both CD, the purchaser, and TH, the mortgagee, TH made a loan of GBP 1,706,000 to CD, which was held on trust for TH in R's client account. R had acted in breach of trust by paying away the sum to intermediary purchasers, who had no contractual relationship with TH, but R contended that the loss arising from the subsequent insolvent winding up of CD was not a loss following from this breach of trust. T had received exactly what it had intended, namely a loan to CD secured by valid charges over the property. TH claimed that R must either reconstitute the trust fund at the date of judgment, or that there had been an immediate loss to the trust fund at the time of breach giving rise to a claim for compensation. The Court of Appeal ordered that R should restore the whole of the loan less GBP 500,000 recovered on the sale of the property. R appealed.

Held, allowing the appeal, that the order of the Court of Appeal giving final judgment for GBP 1,490,000 should be set aside and the order of the court of first instance giving R conditional leave to defend on payment of one million pounds should be restored. A trustee in breach was only liable to compensate for losses caused by the breach and rules of compensation developed in relation to traditional family trusts with a number of beneficiaries should not be applied to commercial trusts. Once a conveyancing transaction had been completed, a client had no further right to have money which was held on trust in a client account restored. Quantum should be fixed at the date of judgment and not at the date of breach. TH had obtained what it had intended and had suffered no compensatable loss; however, if it were determined at trial that without the money made available by TH the transaction would not have proceeded, then the loss suffered by T would be the total sum advanced to CD less the sum recovered. ( _Dawson (Deceased), Re [1966] 2 N.S.W.R. 211_ approved; and Canson Enterprises Ltd v Boughton & Co (1991) 85 D.L.R. (4th) 129 approved; _[Alliance & Leicester Building Society v Edgestop Ltd (Application for Leave) [1993] 1 W.L.R. 1462, [1993] 4 WLUK 255](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5D0ECF01E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fb99adf751bd449e9a7c882141e0b832&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished; and _[Bishopsgate Investment Management Ltd (In Liquidation) v Maxwell (No.1) [1994] 1 All E.R. 261, [1993] 2 WLUK 162](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I3878D1E0E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fb99adf751bd449e9a7c882141e0b832&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished; _[Jaffray v Marshall [1993] 1 W.L.R. 1285, [1992] 7 WLUK 153](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ICBBD28C0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=fb99adf751bd449e9a7c882141e0b832&contextData=(sc.Default))_ overruled).
