---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:36 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:44 am
---

# X v A [2006] 1 WLR 741

## Summary

A proposed advance to release trust funds to apply them to charitable causes could not properly be said to assist a life tenant to discharge her moral obligations and therefore was not a permissible ambit of the power vested in the trustees.

## Abstract

The applicant trustees (X) applied for directions as to whether it was open to them to exercise their powers of revocation and reappointment so as to release a substantial part of the trust capital to the life tenant (W) to enable her to devote it to charitable causes. X were trustees of a marriage settlement by which they had a general power of appointment. They subsequently made a revocable appointment expressed to be made for the benefit of W, who was the wife of the settlor, in assisting her to discharge various moral obligations. W requested that X make an advance to her of the whole trust fund to enable her to make a gift of it to charity. X submitted that the only questions to be answered were whether W was reasonably entitled to regard herself as being under a moral obligation to make or procure the making of the proposed gift to charity and whether she recognised that obligation.

Held, refusing the application, that it could not be said that the proposed advance was relieving W of an obligation she would otherwise have to discharge out of her own resources, if only because the amount proposed to be advanced exceeded her own resources. In any event the court had no reason to suppose that W, considering her own free resources, would regard the advance as having discharged her moral obligation. The moral imperative informing W's request to X might logically be thought to apply to her own assets regardless of whether or not an advance was made out of the trust fund. It was not open to X to make the proposed advance. X's ability to make a payment to W was not decisive of the question of whether a particular payment for a particular purpose was within the power to advance. Such a power could in principle be exercised by advancing money to or for the benefit of W so that she could discharge a moral obligation to charity. However, in the instant case, the exercise actually proposed could not properly be said to be for her benefit. The requirement, that W's material situation would in some way be improved by the proposed advance, could not be satisfied, _[Clore's Settlement Trusts, Re [1966] 1 W.L.R. 955, [1966] 3 WLUK 65](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I88BE20B0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=2d1db88ad31445b1b86bc790d6fd5114&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied.
