---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:36 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:38:44 am
---

# Zeital v Kaye [2010] ECWA Civ 159

## Summary

A purported gift of a share in a company or of a beneficial interest in that share had failed as imperfect as the deceased transferor had had no more than an equitable interest in the share, which formed part of his estate.

## Abstract

The appellant administratrices (G and K) appealed against a decision that they had no beneficial interest in a share issued by a company (D) formed by the deceased (R).

R had died intestate. G and K were his widow and daughter respectively and, with another daughter, were the sole beneficiaries of his estate. R and G had been separated for 20 years prior to his death and R had formed a relationship with another woman (S). R had incorporated D, which had two issued shares. The shares were issued to agents (Y) who held the shares as trustees for R. D had been removed from the register of companies. After R's death, S purported to appoint herself as the sole director of D and applied for D's restoration to the register. D was then entered into members' voluntary liquidation. Its assets included the proceeds from the sale of a property it had acquired. S claimed that R had given her both shares in D and that she was the beneficial owner. G and K claimed that R owned the shares at his death and that his beneficial interest in them formed part of his estate. D's liquidator sought directions from the court. The judge found that R had completed the stock transfer form in relation to one share, naming S as the transferee, which transferred the beneficial interest to her. He found that R had also given her the transfer form relating to the second share without adding her name as transferee. S gave evidence that R had made a gift to her of the second share. The judge concluded that it was R's intention that S should also have a beneficial interest in the second share. He ruled that both shares belonged beneficially to S on R's death and that G and K had no beneficial or legal interest in either share.

G and K submitted that R's method of purportedly transferring the second share to S fell so far short of the formalities required that the gift failed as an imperfect one. S argued that R had done all he could to transfer the share to her and should be regarded as having held the legal title to it on trust for her.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

The judge had been wrong to find that R's actions had transferred the beneficial interest in the second share to S. The interest had remained with R. Immediately before the handing of the stock transfer form to S, Y had been the legal owner of the second share and R its beneficial owner. R therefore had no more than an equitable interest in the share. On the basis that his actions evinced a donative intent in respect of that share, he could have done no more than transfer or assign that equitable interest. The only way that he could have transferred that interest to S was by declaring himself a trustee for S of his equitable interest, or by assigning his interest in writing to her or to a trustee for her, and he had not done so. It followed that R's actions had been ineffective in divesting himself of his equitable interest in the second share. On the assumption that, as part of the process of transferring the second share to S, it would have been sufficient for R simply to hand the stock transfer form to S in its original state, R would have been required to have done all within his power to procure the transfer of the share to S. If he had, so that all that had remained was for S to apply to be registered as its legal owner, it might well follow that, pending such registration, Y was holding the share on trust for S. However, R had not done all in his power to transfer the second share to S and to become registered as a member S also needed the share certificate, the whereabouts of which was unknown. S would not have had any right to obtain a duplicate and R had not equipped her with the title documentation she needed to be registered as a member of D. He had not done all in his power to transfer to her or procure the transfer to her of the second share and his actions had not constituted S as the beneficial owner of that share, _[Rose (Deceased), Re [1952] Ch. 499, [1952] 4 WLUK 23](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8F993C20E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=70dc16c7104d4044a699d7f3fe5aa288&contextData=(sc.Search))_ distinguished, _[Pennington v Waine [2002] EWCA Civ 227, [2002] 1 W.L.R. 2075, [2002] 3 WLUK 58](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I1DAECA30E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=70dc16c7104d4044a699d7f3fe5aa288&contextData=(sc.Search))_ and _[Rose, Re [1949] Ch. 78, [1948] 11 WLUK 14](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I8F9F0880E42811DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=70dc16c7104d4044a699d7f3fe5aa288&contextData=(sc.Search))_ considered. The judge had therefore been wrong to declare that G and K had no beneficial interest in D. He should have held that any purported gift by R to S of the second share or of his beneficial interest in it had failed as having been imperfect. He should also have declared that G and K were entitled, as administratrices of R's estate, to that beneficial interest.
