---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:18 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:29 am
---

# Morris v State Bank of India [2005] 2 BCLC 328

## Summary

The paramount purpose of the [Insolvency Act 1986 s.213](https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/Document/ID70E6A90E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0921d48529d9486aacbb9def6a43ab9e&contextData=(sc.Default)) was to compensate those who had suffered loss as a result of the fraudulent trading and it would defeat the effectiveness of the section in practice if liability were limited to those cases in which the board of directors of an "outsider" company was actually privy to the fraud of the company. The application of [s.213](https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/Document/ID70E6A90E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0921d48529d9486aacbb9def6a43ab9e&contextData=(sc.Default)) required a special rule of attribution in order to make its self evident policy effective.

## Abstract

The appellant bank (B) appealed against a decision that it had been party to fraudulent trading by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) and was accordingly liable to contribute to BCCI's assets pursuant to the [Insolvency Act 1986 s.213](https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/Document/ID70E6A90E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0921d48529d9486aacbb9def6a43ab9e&contextData=(sc.Default)), and the liquidators (L) of BCCI cross appealed. BCCI was an international bank which had collapsed insolvent. Before its collapse, its central treasury division had embarked on a systematic and widespread fraud involving the manipulation of account balances by senior employees to conceal losses which BCCI had incurred. BCCI had entered into a number of transactions with B, the purpose of which from BCCI's point of view had been to use receipts from B to credit heavily overdrawn accounts to give the false impression that those accounts were being serviced and the indebtedness being repaid to some extent by the customers.

L brought proceedings against B alleging that the employees of B responsible for entering into those transactions with BCCI knew that they were thereby dishonestly assisting BCCI to perpetrate a fraud on its creditors. B submitted that  
(1) the judge had erred in concluding that the relevant employee of B, the general manager of its London branch, had been dishonest;  
(2) the employee's dishonesty should not have been attributed to B, because he was not a board member and B's board of directors was its directing mind and will. L submitted, if necessary, that the judge should have concluded that two members of B's board also had knowledge of the fraud since the transactions had been referred to them and approved under delegated powers.

Held, dismissing the appeal and dismissing the cross appeal, that

(1) the judge's conclusion that B's employee had acted dishonestly and had "blind eye" knowledge of BCCI's fraud was one which he was entitled to reach on his findings. The judge had been entitled to conclude that the two board members of B had not been dishonest and the cross appeal was dismissed.

(2) The paramount purpose of s.213 was to compensate those who had suffered loss as a result of the fraudulent trading. A company was capable of being made liable under s.213. It would defeat the effectiveness of the section in practice if liability were limited to those cases in which the board of directors of an "outsider" company was actually privy to the fraud of the company. The application of s.213 required a special rule of attribution in order to make its self evident policy effective, _[Meridian Global Funds Management Asia Ltd v Securities Commission [1995] 2 A.C. 500, [1995] 6 WLUK 307](https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/Document/IF9374F60E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0921d48529d9486aacbb9def6a43ab9e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ considered. It could be appropriate to attribute knowledge of fraud to a company, even though a person with knowledge of the fraud had acted dishonestly, in breach of his duty to his principal and employer and in circumstances in which he would not have passed on his knowledge to his employer, _[McNicholas Construction Co Ltd v Customs and Excise Commissioners [2000] S.T.C. 553, [2000] 6 WLUK 399](https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/Document/IF82988E0E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0921d48529d9486aacbb9def6a43ab9e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ applied and _[Arab Bank Plc v Zurich Insurance Co [1999] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 262, [1998] 6 WLUK 273](https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/Document/I66BF9520E42711DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=0921d48529d9486aacbb9def6a43ab9e&contextData=(sc.Default))_ distinguished.

In the instant case, the employee's acts were not targeted at B; he was acting for, and in what he apparently believed to be the interests of, B. The potential liability of B under s.213 was irrelevant in deciding whether B was a victim of its employee and whether his knowledge should be attributed to B for the purposes of s.213. The judge was right that the employee's knowledge of the fraud of BCCI was sufficient to fix B with liability under s.213, since he had been the person within B who had had authority to deal with BCCI. He was in substance the relevant decision maker for B in respect of the relevant transactions which made B a party to the fraudulent trading of BCCI. Since he had a large measure of responsibility within B for the transactions within BCCI, the policy of s.213, justice and good sense combined to justify treating his knowledge as the knowledge of B so as to make it responsible for contributing to the assets of BCCI in the winding up.

(3) The court refused L's application for permission to amend to plead vicarious liability on the part of B for the acts of its employee in knowingly being a party to the fraudulent trading of BCCI.
