---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:18 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:27 am
---

# Re HLC Environmental Projects Ltd [2013] EWHC 2876 Ch

## Summary

Liquidators were entitled to financial relief against a company director under the misfeasance procedure in the [Insolvency Act 1986 s.212](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID70D0B00E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)) where he had caused the company to make certain payments, despite knowing that the company had been unable to pay its debts as they fell due within [s.123(1)(e)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6C309B0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)) and that the value of its assets was less than its liabilities under [s.123(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6C309B0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)). The director had thereby breached his duty to act in the company's best interest under the [Companies Act 2006 s.172](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5BF3F8308B3311DBA1DB80994EEB92DE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)), coupled with the duty to consider or act in creditors' interests under [s.172(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5BF3F8308B3311DBA1DB80994EEB92DE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)).

## Abstract

The applicant liquidators of an insolvent company (H) applied under the misfeasance procedure in the [Insolvency Act 1986 s.212](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID70D0B00E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)) for financial relief against the respondent director (C) in respect of certain payments he had caused H to make.

C's principal company (E) was Portuguese. H was the holding company for E's interests in the United Kingdom. H and/or its subsidiaries were engaged to undertake two waste management projects. A mechanical engineer (F) previously employed by E worked on the projects. Following financial difficulties, H obtained a revolving credit facility from a bank, secured by E's guarantee. The projects ultimately failed and H went into liquidation. Between November 2005 and October 2008, C had caused H to make payments (i) to E and to him personally; (ii) to a company in which C was investing, for his personal benefit; (iii) directly to F; (iv) due to it under the projects to be paid directly to the bank, to discharge its indebtedness, even though the bank was not a party to any of the projects' agreements. The liquidators sought orders that C pay or, in the case of personal payments, repay to H the sums which he had wrongfully caused to be paid out.

They contended that C had made those payments despite knowing that H was in a precarious financial position in which its liabilities exceeded its assets and that the payments prior to October 1, 2007 were made contrary to C's common law duties as a director, and that those after that date were contrary to the [Companies Act 2006](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I67088A508B0211DBB4C6A18EEE1C8BDD/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)) which codified the common law position, in particular the duty under [s.172](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5BF3F8308B3311DBA1DB80994EEB92DE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)) to act in the company's best interests, coupled with the duty to consider or act in creditors' interests under [s.172(3)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I5BF3F8308B3311DBA1DB80994EEB92DE/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)). C submitted that he lacked the subjective knowledge of H's doubtful solvency or existence of creditors required by s.172(3).

## Held

Application granted.

(1) Between November 2005 and October 2008, H had been unable to pay its debts as they fell due within [s.123(1)(e)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6C309B0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)) of the 1986 Act, and the value of its assets was less than its liabilities under [s.123(2)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/ID6C309B0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default)). Directors were not free to take action which put the interests of the company ahead of creditors' prospects of being paid. The duties under s.172 of the 2006 Act were usually subjective. However, an objective test would apply  
(a) in considering whether creditors' interests were paramount;  
(b) where there was no evidence of actual consideration: the test was then whether an intelligent and honest man in the director's position could have reasonably believed that the transaction was for the company's benefit;  
(c) where a large creditor's interest was overlooked. The general principle of subjectivity did not apply to the situation in the instant case. In any event, C had subjective knowledge that H was of doubtful solvency and he had known of its creditors (see paras [86, 89, 92-94](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs") of judgment).

(2) C had not acted reasonably in making the payment to E. In respect of H's payments to C directly or for his personal benefit, C had failed to prove that they were proper: his decision to make them was made without any consideration to H or its creditors' best interests. In arranging payments directly to the bank, C had not genuinely believed that the bank had a legal right to them: his purpose had been to reduce E's exposure on its guarantee to the bank, without any consideration of H's or the creditors' interests. F had never been employed by H and in authorising payments directly to him, C had been unconcerned as to H's liabilities. C had not acted reasonably in making any of the payments: breaches of the statutory duties under s.172 were made out (paras [109, 115-116, 123-124, 128, 131-132](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(3) C was ordered to repay the sums he had received directly from H or for his personal benefit, and to pay H the sums he had wrongfully caused to be paid to F (paras [146-147](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).

(4) Since the payments to the bank and E discharged H's genuine liabilities, an order against C for payment to H of the sums he wrongfully caused to be paid to them should be qualified by a proviso that, in distributing H's assets to unsecured creditors, the debts due from H to E and the bank should be notionally increased to what they would have been had the payments not been made, _[Liquidator of West Mercia Safetywear Ltd v Dodd (1988) 4 B.C.C. 30, [1987] 11 WLUK 231](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I7052EA60E43611DA8FC2A0F0355337E9/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=6bd21799ab694eb2b274830a03b74419&contextData=(sc.Default))_ followed (paras [148-152](javascript:void(0); "View judgment paragraphs")).
