---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:19 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:27 am
---

# Re Tobian Properties Ltd [2012] EWCA Civ 998

## Summary

A judge had erred in dismissing a shareholder's petition for relief from unfairly prejudicial conduct by a company's sole director arising out of his excessive remuneration on the basis that it had been disclosed in the company's accounts. That approach involved a new restriction on the manner in which shareholders could enforce the liability of directors for wrongs to their company and imposed a requirement for diligence that had no basis in the statutory provisions or in principle or authority.

## Abstract

The appellant (M) appealed against a decision ([2011] EWHC 2186 (Ch)) dismissing his shareholder's petition for relief from unfairly prejudicial conduct by the respondent (Y).  
M owned 25 per cent of the share capital in a company (T) and the remainder was mostly held by Y, who was T's sole director. T had traded as an estate agency under the name "Oliver Jaques". When it entered creditors' voluntary liquidation, its business was carried on by a company (E) owned in part by Y. M issued an unfair prejudice petition under the Companies Act 2006 s.994 alleging that T's affairs had been conducted by Y in a manner which was unfairly prejudicial to him. M contended that Y had permitted E to trade as "Oliver Jaques" at a time when T had also been trading under that name without requiring any payment from E for its use, that Y had caused T to pay him excessive remuneration, and that when T was known to be proceeding towards insolvent liquidation, he had caused it to transfer its business and its goodwill in the name "Oliver Jaques" to E for only £5,000, which was paid to the liquidator in order to fund her putting T into liquidation. The judge found that Y's remuneration was excessive, but that since that had been clearly disclosed in T's accounts and had been unchallenged by M, it would not be proper to treat it as unfairly prejudicial to T's interests. The judge found that Y had also acted in breach of the duties he owed to T as a director by setting up E in order to open estate agencies trading under the "Oliver Jaques" name, but that because those offices were unprofitable, no loss was suffered by T as a result and that could not, therefore, constitute a ground of unfair prejudice. The judge also held that whilst E's acquisition of T's business name, trade connections and other assets was a matter of prejudice, given T's financial state M had suffered no relevant unfair prejudice for the purposes of s.994. He therefore dismissed M's petition. It fell to be determined whether the judge had been correct in law to rule that there had been no“unfair prejudice”" for the purposes of s.994.

## Held

Appeal allowed.

(1) The judge's conclusion that Y's excessive remuneration was not unfairly prejudicial because M could have found the information about the excessive remuneration by inspecting T's accounts was wrong in principle since it involved a new restriction on the manner in which shareholders could enforce the liability of directors for wrongs to their company. The judge's approach meant that minority shareholders were at risk of losing their rights to enforce a director's liability to their company if they did not read their company's filed accounts. That imposed a requirement for diligence that had no basis in the statutory provisions or in principle or authority. M's appeal had to be allowed on the first ground (see paras 31-32 of judgment).  
(2) There was a real prospect that the claim based on excessive remuneration could lead to the grant of relief even though M did not adduce expert evidence as to how T's loss should be quantified at the liability trial. There were ample grounds on which the judge could have concluded that Y's remuneration was out of the norm for that particular company, and in that sense (if no other) that the remuneration was excessive. In the circumstances, it was just and convenient to remit the issue of the quantification of the element of Y's remuneration to a quantum hearing (paras 48-49). (3) By not negotiating a licence fee from E for use of the "Oliver Jaques" name, Y had failed to protect the interests of T as he was bound to do in order to discharge his duties as its director. The correct measure of loss for that prejudice was the amount that T would have received if Y and E had negotiated at arm's length for a licence for E to use T's trading name for the period 2005 to 2008 (para.53).  
(4) Y was clearly responsible in law for fixing the price of £5,000 for the eve of liquidation sale of T's assets, including its trading name, to E in his capacity as T's sole director, and he had not discharged his duties as a director in fixing it. Y had fixed it not by reference to T's best interests but by reference to the estimate of the sum that needed to be injected into T so that a meeting of creditors could be called and T put into voluntary liquidation. The question of the value of the claim arising out of that breach of duty would also be remitted to a further hearing (paras 56-57).
