---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:19 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:27 am
---

# Rover International Ltd v Cannon Film Sales (No 3) [1987] BCLC 540

A contract did not exist where it had been made between a company and another before the formation of the company: nor could an estoppel arise in those circumstances. The first plaintiff claimed on a contract alleged to have been made in December 1985. In fact the plaintiff was only incorporated in Guernsey in February 1986. The plaintiff argued that there was a valid contract signed for the plaintiff in January 1986 and the defendant had signed after the plaintiff was incorporated, constituting acceptance by the defendant of an offer in writing extant at the time of the acceptance. The plaintiff also argued that the defendant was estopped from denying the validity of the contract because the parties subsequently acted on a common belief that there was such a contract. Thirdly, the plaintiff argued that the fourth plaintiff, Mr de Rossi, was the contracting party with the defendant under the [Companies Act 1985 s.36(4)](https://uk.westlaw.com/Document/I9115F8A0E44A11DA8D70A0E70A78ED65/View/FullText.html?originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&ppcid=560e05cd40a640a89fc14923a1fa9574&contextData=(sc.Search)) which provides: "where a contract purports to be made by a company, or by a person as agent for a company, at a time when the company has not been formed, then…the contract has effect as one entered into by the person purporting to act for the company or as agent for it." The plaintiffs also claimed in the alternative on a quantum meruit as for moneys had and received.

Held, giving judgment for the defendant, that, (1) There was no evidence that the defendant had signed the contract after the date of incorporation of the plaintiff. It was signed by both parties before the incorporation. There was no contract since if someone did not exist, they could not contract. (2) There was no estoppel on the basis of a common mistake. Where one party did not exist at the time of the supposed assumption of agreed facts, it could not make an assumption of agreed facts. (3) "Company" in s.36(4) was restricted to UK companies: see s.735(1). As the first plaintiff was a Guernsey company, the fourth party was not a contracting party. (4) There was no basis for a claim for quantum meruit. It was impossible to make out where both parties acted on the basis of a contract. Likewise there was no claim for moneys had and received since the consideration, if there had been a contract, had not failed at all.
