---
aliases: 
tags: 
date created: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:02:19 am
date modified: Sunday, December 10th 2023, 12:41:26 am
---

# Sharp v Blank [2015] EWHC 3220 (Ch)

## Summary

In a claim by a bank's shareholders, alleging misrepresentations by the bank's directors concerning an acquisition, the court struck out various claims that the directors had breached fiduciary duties. Although the directors had a duty to provide the shareholders with sufficient information to enable them to make an informed choice about the acquisition, they did not owe any wider fiduciary duties because no special relationship existed and they had not undertaken to act for the shareholders in any more extended sense.

## Abstract

The defendants, directors of Lloyds TSB, applied for summary judgment and/or to strike out various parts of a claim brought by the bank's shareholders.  
The directors had been directors of Lloyds TSB at the time of its acquisition of Halifax Bank of Scotland Plc. The shareholders alleged misrepresentations by the directors in relation to the acquisition. They pleaded breach of various fiduciary and tortious duties by the directors. They asserted that the directors had superior knowledge to them and had voluntarily undertaken responsibility for the correctness and accuracy of information. The directors accepted that they owed a "sufficient information duty", namely a duty to provide shareholders with sufficient information to enable them to make an informed decision about how to vote in relation to the acquisition. In light of that, they also accepted that they owed duties not to mislead or conceal material information and to advise and inform the shareholders in clear and comprehensible terms. However, they denied that they owed various other fiduciary duties which had been pleaded.  
The directors submitted that (1) they did not owe fiduciary duties to the company's shareholders; (2) it would not be possible for the shareholders to establish certain claims that the directors had breached tortious duties by putting the proposed acquisition to the shareholders and permitting the emergency general meeting to take place on the basis of what they knew to be incomplete and misleading information.

## Held

Judgment accordingly.

The fiduciary duties owed by directors were well-established. They owed fiduciary duties to the company as they were its agents and stewards of its affairs. They did not, solely by virtue of their office of director, owe fiduciary duties to the shareholders, collectively or individually. However, there were circumstances where directors had been held to owe particular fiduciary duties to shareholders. Such duties were dependent on establishing a "special factual relationship" between the directors and the shareholders, Peskin v Anderson [2001] B.C.C. 874, [2000] 12 WLUK 421 applied, Allen v Hyatt (1914) 30 T.L.R. 444, Coleman v Myers [1977] 2 N.Z.L.R. 225, [1977] 1 WLUK 748, Chez Nico (Restaurants) Ltd, Re [1991] B.C.C. 736, [1991] 7 WLUK 203 and Platt v Platt [1999] 2 B.C.L.C. 745, [1999] 7 WLUK 398 considered. That special relationship had to be something over and above the usual relationship which a director had with shareholders. It was not enough that a director had more knowledge of the company's affairs than the shareholders because that would almost inevitably be the case. Nor was it enough that the actions of the directors would have the potential to affect the shareholders. There had to be some personal relationship or particular dealing or transaction between them. A fiduciary was someone who had undertaken to act for or on behalf of another in circumstances which gave rise to a relationship of trust and confidence. That was why the distinguishing obligation of a fiduciary was the obligation of loyalty. The cases where such a duty had been held to exist between directors and shareholders mostly concerned companies which were small and closely held, where there was often a family or other personal relationship between the parties. In the instant case, there was no special relationship. Once the sufficient information duty was accepted, the facts did not give rise to any other duty. The relationship was one of giving advice and information for a particular purpose but the directors had not undertaken to act for or on behalf of the shareholders in any more extended sense. The correct starting point was to identify the content of the sufficient information duty. That duty did not share the characteristics typical of fiduciary duties. Its wellspring was not that the directors had agreed to put the interests of the shareholders first, but that if they were going to invite the shareholders to a meeting, common fairness required that they explain what the purpose of the meeting was. The reason was fairness, not loyalty, RAC Motoring Services Ltd, Re [2000] 1 B.C.L.C. 307, [1998] 7 WLUK 133 applied. It was therefore doubtful whether the sufficient information duty was a fiduciary duty at all, but even if it was, it did not seem to include all the usual attributes of fiduciary duties, Bristol & West Building Society v Mothew (t/a Stapley & Co) [1998] Ch. 1, [1996] 7 WLUK 396 applied. The sufficient information duty did not include the fiduciary duties which the shareholders claimed were owed to them by the directors, namely a duty to act in good faith; a duty to act in the best interests of the shareholders and to prevent them from suffering loss; a duty not to place themselves in a position where their duties to the shareholders conflicted with their personal interests or duties to third parties; and a duty to act for a proper purpose. Those duties would therefore be struck out under CPR r.3.4(2)(a) on the basis that they disclosed no reasonable grounds for bringing the claim (see paras 9-16, 18-23 of judgment). (2) Certain claims concerning breach of tortious duties were struck out. Those pleadings were unsustainable because they did not require the shareholders to establish causation by proving what would have happened if the directors had not called the emergency general meeting and had made the disclosure which the shareholders said they should have made. There was no suggestion that the shareholders could establish the necessary causation (paras 26-31).
